...
you
can sit
here.
Unless you want to
sit?
Right.
Do
you want to shut the door there, Jonathan? Thank you. W- Welcome.
It's lovely to have you here. Um, if you want to do some introductions,
um, we've got you down for an hour, um, so we'll, we'll see how we go in terms
that timeframe. If we
fill it up, we'll fill it up. If we go slightly shorter, we'll go slightly shorter.
But anyway, we, we, we're very interested in the maritime sector, as you know,
because of our Ports Maritime Inquiry.
So, um,
if we want to ... w- w- we want to start off, maybe give, uh, say, five minutes or
so intro of any key issues you want to raise and then we'll go to questions.
Okay. Thank you very much. Thank you for the opportunity to be
here. Um, Mr. Chair, um, members
of the committee, uh, we, uh, (clears throat) sorry, appreciate the opportunity
to meet with you today. I'm meeting with, um, I'm here with Kirsty
Hewlett, who's our chief executive, um, with Peter ...
And she's also, of course, the director under the legislation.
Peter Brunt, who's our DCE, uh, regulatory frameworks and
technical support, and Graeme McVeigh, who is our DCE
response security and, uh, safety services.
So we hope that between us all, we can answer any of your
questions. Um, so as you're aware that as the, sort of,
guardian of New Zealand's ports, oceans and waterways, Maritime
New Zealand, um, does deliver outcomes that are safe,
secure, clean and sustainable for all New
Zealanders. Um, the past year has been one of, um,
progress through collaboration and partnership with the sector, working
smarter and delivering results across a range of areas.
Um, the maritime sector, I would make the point, is key to New Zealand's
livelihood. 99% of our imports and exports
by volume and 79% by value go across our ports.
Uh, in particular, in '24-'25, we advanced
key priorities aligned with the government and ministerial expectations
and delivered on regulatory frameworks as part of our strategy.
This progress was made despite a levy shortfall, uh, which we
can talk about later, through careful planning and use of reserves and targeted
savings enabled by improvements to our operating
model. Uh, digitization has been and continues
to be a major focus. Uh, we've made good progress on making it
easier for those we regulate to interact with us
digitally. Our regulated parties can now report incidents
from any digital device through an easy-to-use digital
form. This, combined with improvements to how we triage and respond to
notifications, including after hours, has meant people receive a
timely and appropriate response.
We've al- also made good progress on digitizing seafarer
applications alongside changes to improved processes,
rules and policies, uh, always with input from the sector.
This work will be launched along with a simplified website early in
2026. Um, these initiatives reduce time and cost,
not just for regulated parties, but provide internal
efficiencies for Maritime New Zealand while delivering safety
outcomes. Uh, and in fact, we've recently even returned some of those
saf- uh, those savings to applicants, which, um, the
chief executive can talk about. We continued progress on our
journey to implement our new regulatory approach focused on preventing
harm. This has involved targeting our regulatory activity to the
areas of greatest harm to people, the marine environment, property and
economy. It's also meant deploying a broader range of corrective and
enforcement tools, creating better transparency about how
and why we carry out our role and importantly continuing to
strengthen our partnerships with the sector through multi-year
harm prevention programs of interventions.
Um, these harm prevention programs are delivering
results. Uh, fertili- f- fatalities in the commercial
sector have continued to decline since '21-'22.
Uh, we extended our health and safety designation across all 13
commercial ports, taking up an increased, um, responsibility
there and with the Port Health and Safety Leadership Group, we launched
the approved code of practice for loading and unloading of cargo at
ports and on ships to create ba- baseline safety
standards in ports. And I would say that, as a board, we're very proud
of the approach that our exec take in terms of, um,
a collaborative leadership approach with the sector in terms of getting
these sub-types of things into place very quickly and,
and with a, a, a s- an aligned sector.
In the fishing sector, we established the, um, Fishers, uh, Health and Safety
Leadership Group and a work program based on critical
risks. Our first winter campaign targeting recreational
boaters, Better Your Odds, highlighted heightened risks outside the summer
season.
We also supported an efficient and sustainable maritime sector
prioritizing, uh, progressing priority rule amendments
identified in conjunction with the sector, including workforce initiatives
to ensure that maritime sector needs are understood and catered for, and
pathways for new and low-carbon technologies, including
lithium battery safety. We continue to,
uh, engage internationally to influence changes to the international
conventions that New Zealand has signed, and over the coming year, we'll
be focused on ensuring planned changes to those conventions
support and enable New Zealanders in our maritime industry
to thrive. And Kirsty's recently-...
returned from the IMO and can talk further about that.
Close to home, we continue our support for Pacific Island countries
and have been actively exploring ways-
Mm.
... to deliver maximum value for the region.
Our readiness and response capability was tested-
Mm.
... during the year with significant maritime events, including the Aratiri
and the Manaho, uh, groundings and the HMNZS Manawanui
sinking in Samoa. These responses demonstrated
our ability to deploy quickly, and lessons learned are informing
the development of our next version of our integrated incident
readiness and response strategy.
So, I want to acknowledge on behalf of the board the real dedication of
Kirsty and her team and our staff and the collaboration of our
sector partners. I think together we are building a safer, more
resilient, and sustainable, sustainable maritime system,
uh, for Aotearoa. So thank you.
Thank you,
Kirsty and I are very happy, um, to answer any questions.
We have a few questions. I, I'm actually going to give myself the luxury of the
first one.
Oh
Um, so just in terms of the IMO engagement, uh, there's parts of our, part of
our, as part of our ports and maritime,
um, uh, inquiry, one of the things that's come through very
clearly is the timeliness of shipping getting to New Zealand is very
poor. Uh, by the time it's got out of New Zealand, it's worse.
Um, but one of the things which we've been told quite regularly is the IMO
standards around the speed that vessels are a- able to travel is a
problem. In other words, there's a maximum speed.
If you go beyond that, you start getting, um, penalized financially.
Um, in terms of the engagement there, and I think New Zealand's probably, because
it's further away than anywhere else, uh, in the world, um, that part particularly
suffers from that. Just wonder what conversations have been had or what levers we
can (clears throat) try and change that, those
settings.
Um, I don't think... I think that what you might be referring
to is the zero emissions framework-
It's, it's all related-
...
and poten- ... to zero emissions, yes.
Potential measures.
So that, that, that framework is not in.
It was not agreed by the IMO.
Um, so, um, what you might be getting is concerns
for the future around, um, penalizing, um,
over distance, uh,
So that framework is not in place?
No, it's not. Um, I, I, um, I
can't think of any other standards that you're talking about which would be
penalizing that.
That's the, that's the one that's being referred to, is definitely the carbon
emission side of things.
Yeah.
So you're saying that's not in place?
No, the IMO did not agree-
Yeah.
... um, to put in place the emissions framework.
That was deferred for a year-
Right.
... um, while more work would-
Okay. ... could be done between the countries on that framework-
Okay, well if-
... and measures.
Okay, so if it's deferred for a year, that means there's consideration still to
come, so in your engagement with the, um, with
that further consideration, what's the position that New
Zealand is representing on that?
So we do not lead what the government's view is on the zero-
Oh, that's
right, yes. ... emissions framework and measures.
We provide techn- technical advice and to the ministry-
Yes.
... who then feeds that into Cabinet, who makes decisions on how they want to-
So, so that's-
... approach them. ... that's something we should reflect, should ask the government rather than-
Yes.
... itself. Okay, that's
What we do is technical standards that relate to things like methanol shipping-
So, so-
... response as well.
So just to finish my line off, why then would we be getting advice
from various
agencies that we've, uh, and companies that we've talked to, which are saying
that that issue is a problem already, as opposed to
it is one that we're fearing? You know, they just misunderstand-
I'm not sure it would be IMO standards.
I think as-
It was, uh, specifically IMO, specifically zero carbon.
Uh, mm, no, I don't think-
I, I think, I think it may be anticipating the effect of-
Yeah. (clears throat)
... a carbon price that would be implemented through essentially that standard.
I think it is, it's an anticipation of concern, um, the way it's been reflected to
us. Um, so it's more a concern about the future than the current
settings.
Okay, that's very helpful. Thank you.
Yeah.
Tom.
Yeah, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank you for coming in.
Your annual report talks about the significant investment in reading this
in response capability. Uh, and Dame Jo, you've, you've touched on the
fact that that has been called upon over the, the last 12
months. Um, if we look at the context at the same time,
the government has decided not to proceed with procuring a,
uh, vessel that would add to, uh, resilience within the Cook
Strait. So my question is, what advice, if any, or what involvement
has Maritime New Zealand had in providing advice to the government in
reaching that decision not to procure, uh, emergency
support, uh, which potentially might be at people's sort of times of,
of need?
I'll turn to her directly.
So, yeah. So, um, we as, as you're probably aware, we did the detailed
business case on potential options for emergency
towage, and we also provided advice on the current arrangement that's in
play. Um, the Ministry led the advice to ministers on
the f- on the, um, decisions around, um,
the, the ETV.
What, what does Maritime New Zealand identify as the risks associated
with the government's
decision?
Um, so
I guess it's up to the government, um, to make the choice on a cost-benefit
anal- analysis around emergency towage.
As the safety regulator, of course we would prefer to have an emergency
towage vessel around the coast.
I understand that, but my question is like, what, what does Maritime New...
I appreciate the government have made-
Yeah.
... this decision.
Or ministers have.
Yeah.
But from Maritime New Zealand's perspective, when you say that your preference
would be to have that, uh, redundancy or resilience within the
system, why would that be the case?
Um, I think, uh, a- as you
well know, there, there have been times, um, across the New Zealand
coast over the last two to three years where an emergency towage
vessel has been needed. One would be the Shilene, another would be Lara
Tedes, where the engine propulsion on both those vessels
went, and it required an emergency towage vessel to tow it to port.
Okay.So, in terms of mitigating that
risk, what, what would you see as
some of the options that would now be-
(clears throat)
... effectively at play if, if this resilience factor is being effectively, uh,
canceled by the government?
So, um, as the Maritime Regulator, we will choose whatever
assets are available around our coast in any
situation. I, I can't foretell what those assets will be-
Sure. ... at any one time. Um, there will, there is still an asset around the
coast, um-
Neither
is I. ... but we will... W- W- There is still an asset-
... around the coast at the moment, but, um, uh, we, we will use whatever
we can, um, in eith- uh, ever which way we can in any kind of
maritime incident readiness and response from what's available.
Okay, just one final question on that, Mr. Chair.
In terms of there being an asset around the coast-
Yeah.
... what would be the maximum period of time,
uh, for that vessel to get, depending on where it is
of course-
Yeah.
... but you know how this all works.
Mm-hmm.
What would be the maximum period of time that it would take to get that vessel
located from its sort of furtherest,
uh, point to a situation in the Cook
Strait?
So, uh, again, I don't know where the vessel will be.
We'll call on whatever vessels are available, including the ones closest to the
Cook Strait if an i- issue happened in the Cook Strait.
Okay. But-
Yeah.
... is it accepted that without a dedicated resource located
nearby or in the Cook Strait-
(clears throat)
... that this potentially could, um...
Well, that mitigation is something that the government would need to turn its
mind to?
That's a good question.
I think it would... Again, it would depend on what vessel you're talking about,
where the vessel was, what, um... And what assets there were, where they were
on the coast. It's quite a difficult question,
Sure. No, I appreciate that. Yeah.
Can I just follow up on, on that one?
Which is, at the mo- so the vessel which we talk about is the, the one that's up at
the, in Taranaki, um-
Mm-hmm.
... that's, uh, associated with the oil and gas fields?
Yeah.
If the oil and gas fields no longer exists or this, it's no longer needed by them,
one assumes that it doesn't exi- that that vessel will then exit the country unless
there's a reason for it to stay.
Yeah, that vessel may-
Yeah, okay. So-
... may, may leave, but there might be other reasons for-
Okay,
so- ... for vessels like that around our coast in the future.
Okay, well, i- so, so I think the question-
Wind farms, et cetera.
... Tangi was, what Tangi was looking for, and I, I'm, I'm looking for the same,
is, um, you would employ whatever vessels are around.
Now, that sounds
fine, but if the vessels... It's like saying, "Well, I'll go, go to my toolbox and
get the saw out that isn't there." Um, you know, it's, it's no good using a hammer
when you needed a saw. Do we actually have vessels that will actually do the job
if we need, uh... If the situation where, you know, you said, you mentioned the
Shy Lane, there's the possibility of the rail ferries...
And we, we know that they, they've been worked on, and there's new ferries coming,
et cetera. Uh, I can't remember what you said the other, the other ship was.
But if something goes wrong in that situation, are there actually
vessels in the New Zealand network that actually could,
perform a rescue operation? I'm just-
Uh, if, if you took the case of the Shy Lane, um, there, we were lucky there was a
vessel around at that particular point in time.
Actually it wasn't the MMA Vision. It was a different vessel.
At the moment there is one vessel. If there was not a vessel around the coast of
the type of the MMA Vision at the moment, um, that vessel would have
had to have... We would have had to get something, or it would have had to get
something from offshore to come and tow it.
So then we would rely on that, the vessel which was-
Yeah. ... uh, in difficulty being... It would have to, um,
m- (laughs) basically moor itself wherever it was, or, uh, somewhere safely as long
as it could.
Yeah.
Does that constitute a, a real risk?
And I'm, I'm thinking again, um, in the situation we had with, uh, rail
ferries, um... It was Kai Taki wasn't it, which was off the shore
of the Wellington, off the Wellington South Coast, which obviously lost propulsion
for a while. The, the local tugs went out to,
uh, uh, at least try and provide some stability as I understand it.
I don't know all the details. You will know those much more than I do.
Mm-hmm.
But, um, you know, do we, do we potentially put ourselves in a position where there
is nothing available? I mean, getting a ship, getting a vessel from
Australia-
Yeah.
... say, offshore-
... is not gonna get there very quickly.
No.
So-
So yes, there would be a risk that there isn't a vessel that can come
quickly.
And that the vessel which is in trouble is not able to secure itself in place,
and is potentially at risk of
hitting the, of, of running aground, or-
Y- Y- E- Yes, it would depend how far close it was to the coast.
Yeah. How, how significant is that risk in your view?
Um, well, (laughs) I, I... That's a difficult thing to-
Well, we-
... to quantify, you know? (laughs)
Well, no. I, I under-
Yeah.
I understand that, but I mean, we, we make judgments about
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
... in, in all kinds of areas. I mean, is this something that's a very unlikely
risk? Is it a high... You know, a, I mean, you could...
If you did a risk matrix-
Yeah.
... what does it look like?
I think it... I would, I would say it's a low risk-
Okay.
... but it's not no risk.
Okay. It's a low risk o- It's a low risk of likely it could of happening,
and if it does happen in that low risk situation, what is the
likely consequence of that risk? You know, looking at the, the sort of matrix that
you usually do in terms of risk management?
Yeah. A- again, it would depend where the vessel is.
Hm.
So even in, in the, in the event of the Kai Taki, we don't know for sure even if we
had an ETV whether it would have got there in time.
Sure.
So you don't know. It would depend-
Yeah.
It will depend very much whether it's on open sea, on the coast, how close it is to
the coast, whereabouts it is around New Zealand, all of those different kinds of
factors.
Okay. Simon, and then Dan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'd like to change tack.
Uh, I'd like to, uh, ask some questions
about the regulatory safety and technical
capability that Maritime New Zealand has.
Uh, a number of stakeholders have raised with me concern
that Maritime New Zealand does not have sufficient technical
capability to undertake its role.
And I think it's important that we, we use this opportunity to
actually flesh this out.
Mm-hmm.
So I'm interested, say, in the, in your executive team, uh, maybe
cast a little wider than top three layers of management, how many individuals
would have-... commercial maritime
qualifications and how many of those
senior staff, and say the top three layers of management, would have
experience in commercial operations at
sea?
Yeah. So, um, I think, uh, around my
leadership team, we have two people who have, um, from the New Zealand
Navy who have operated large vessels.
In fact, one of them is sitting right behind me. Um, we have...
We are a regulator, so when we have, uh, tier two
and tier three functions, it very much depends the expertise
we put on them as the ones that we need to be able to deliver something.
So, for example, uh, uh, someone that has run
a large commericial- commercial ship won't be leading our
Regulatory Frameworks team.
So, very much we have a suite of capabilities across our
organization. Many people who sit in our Technical Advice and Support
Services function or are naval architects, um, who...
And same with our Maritime Inspections team, maritime engineers,
master mariners, a whole raft of people that do those roles.
They are in the right places of our organization to give us the technical
advice and support when we need it to be able to deliver all of our
functions.
Okay.
Yeah.
So you've mentioned two former naval personnel.
Mm-hmm.
My question was specifically around commercial maritime
qualifications.
Yeah.
How many individuals in your senior leadership team, and, um, and maybe if we think
about, you know, levels two, three, have got commercial maritime
qualifications? You might need to come back to the committee with that answer.
Yeah.
Um, and secondly, how many of those people have had
commercial maritime experience at sea as opposed to
navy? (clears throat)
Yeah. So, I... We can answer it for the leadership team, as I said, because there
are two from navy, and then at, uh, the rest of our leadership
team, we can come back and give you the facts on that.
So, so-
But again, I stand behind recruitment of the right people to the right types of
functions to be able to deliver our roles, our different roles,
and I feel confident that we have the technical expertise and experience in the
right parts of our organization for making those judgments and providing
advice and support directly to me, the leadership team, and the
board. Including the fact we have a chief technical officer with
commercial maritime experience across a range of all commercial vessels
who will be able to, whenever we need expertise and advice, be able
to provide that. In fact, has a d- dotted line directly to me.
Further supplementary, Mr. Chair.
Yep.
Um, I'm looking at your recent engagement
survey called The Voice of Us All, run from 14 to 28 March
2025. 92% of your staff
participated,
only 44% said the right people were rewarded and recognized at
Maritime New Zealand.
Mm-hmm.
How do you explain that?
Um, I think, uh, what I would say with that question
is that is an area where, um, we have done,
uh, an action plan off the back of it.
Mm-hmm.
I think, um, a lot of people reflected in the comments on the survey that that was
a very hard question to ask, because, uh, answer,
because, um, people said they didn't know who the right people
were. (laughs) Um, so that was quite a lot of the feedback on that.
But for me, what is really important is that people have career development
opportunities in this organization-
Mm-hmm.
... and we invest quite significant money, um, in, um, being able
to provide people with those development opportunities, either technically for
their role or around leadership or support, um.
Do you think that potentially the right people
could have been people with commercial maritime experience or
qualifications who are integral to the performance of
Maritime New Zealand's operations?
So, uh, I'd- I'm not... I think
that, uh, that question is relevant to all people across our
organization. But again, I think we have, uh, a number
of people who have got good commercial
maritime, uh, experience and skills-
(clears throat)
... who are in senior roles in our lo- organization.
In fact, we've created some more roles in, in our Maritime Inspections team around-
Mm-hmm.
... management recently who are master mariners and master engineers as
well.
Okay. Um, Dan.
Uh, thank you for your, um, uh, you and your organization for all you do for our
maritime sector. Um, I just want to turn now
to deficit. So, um, you've been running a
deficit, uh, last year or the year under review.
Can I just clarify how many years Maritime New Zealand has been running financial
deficits?
Yeah. So, um, I think that's- the- that's a tricky question
to answer because there's two different rationales for those.
So, over the COVID period, you'll appreciate when there was no cruise
ships coming, um, and yet, um, co- that cargo was
variable. Um, the government did support us over
that period, um, to make up the delta, um, while we were dealing with
COVID. Um, when we were coming out of COVID, we had a
maritime levy review. Um, it was...
Uh, we, we model, um, our levy, uh,
revenue almost about 18 to 2 years out from when the
levy comes in, um, and there was a lot of uncertainty around recovery
of both crews and the economy coming out of COVID.
Um, so when we established what we thought we would get
for the levy, um, we probably, I think were,
uh, um, uh, it turns out, overly optimistic on both
financial recovery, but we've also seen, um, a 36
reduc- percent reduction in cruise visits in New Zealand.
Mm. Yeah.
And that is what has led to that levy shortfall-
(clears throat)
... in our maritime levy. Um, how we've managed that maritime levy
shortfall over the current levy period is through savings of
16% in our maritime levy, um, and through use of
reserves to get us through this levy period.
And then how we're dealing with, I guess, the sustainability or
uncertainty through the next levy period is we have a levy review out for
consultation at the moment.
Yes. Uh, so could I just clarify? So I, I, I take your
response, um, seriously, but, um-From
a, from a financial statement perspective, you're saying that
since COVID, Maritime New Zealand has been in deficit?
Is that what I understood?
Yes, from-
Okay.
... this levy period which started 1 July 2024.
Yeah.
And, what is the pathway back to
surplus? Um, I think I understand this financial year
you're forecast to be in deficit by about a million
dollars? Um, is that-
Could-
Firstly, is that correct? And secondly,
uh, what's the-
Yeah.
... what's the forecast
back then? Perhaps you could answer and then I should answer from a board point of view?
Yes, that'd
be great. 'Cause we obviously overview that.
Yeah.
Yeah. It's actually more like a $2.5 billion
deficit. Um-
Forecasts for this
current- ... that has been used from the reserves.
Yeah.
The rest of the money, or the deficit or shortfall we had, we've made up from
savings, so.
Okay, so that's for this coming year?
Yeah.
Is there, um, a medium turn pathway for the
organization to balance the books?
Um, you know, understanding the pressures-
Yeah.
... on the money you're not getting in from cruise ships and so forth?
Is there a medium term pathway for the organization?
Yes, that's what the current levy review that's out for consultation is.
It's got three options. Do nothing, which would mean we would have
to reduce our maritime levy activity by another 20%.
Uh, just get inflation, um, for the next three-year levy
period, or deal with the shortfall and, um,
uh, the inflationary cost pressures with a refund mechanism built
in, so if the, if cruise or the economy recovers, actually
that, um, shortfall will be decreased anyway.
Understood, and so you certainly take the fact that, um, you, there's
revenue you're not getting in because of the economic conditions.
Is, is the view of the organization, or one option to
right-size the organization based on that
shortfall?
Could, could I just answer that?
Yeah.
We, we've already done that. We have done that, um, in fact, um, Kirsty and her
team have, team have taken out about 5.6 million in savings
to-
Yes.
... in fact be able to help to meet that.
One of the issues I think as a board we have to o- overview is that
we, uh, obviously based on the funding review process,
um, and it's only set every three years, when we, there, there will
be some use of reserves to smooth that over that time, so we do expect
that some years will be under and some will be over.
And so, we keep a very close eye on that.
Yeah. And have conversations, if Kirsty will always tell us where
she's finding the savings, and in terms of even the funding review that's out
where she's already pr- been able to spell out what
the consequences are, because when you're funded in the way we are, then if you
know the money's not gonna come in, we've actually got to reduce our service.
And, um, and so we ha- we have to very carefully go through and determine
where,
where we can do that. So yes, the, Kirsty's done that
exercise and the Board's considered that, so-
Yeah.
... that's part of the whole process.
That's encouraging.
And so, final question is, um, you know, around your
savings, uh, exercise, is w- where are you,
where is that coming from? Is it, um-
Yeah.
... is it, is it staff numbers or is it programs and initiatives?
Is it, um, you know, other?
So maybe I can start by saying-
(coughs) ... actually, we started our savings program before the last levy
review.
Yes.
So, um, we actually have done an organizational strategy we call Te
Korowai Kaitiakitanga which was actually looking at where we could be more
efficient.
Right.
So, the ty- types of things that we've done is we have reduced our
property footprint in Wellington by 19%.
Um, we've reduced our contractors and consultants this year.
I think it's off total operating, it's at 5%, so very
low. Um, we have, um, through reorganization and
refocusing, got our overheads down to 26%, which
is, uh, by both public and private sector
considered efficient. Um, we have prioritized our
travel, our learning and development, we've been digitizing our
services, and yes, where, um, that has led to us removing
roles, we have done that as well. So, we have, I guess we've looked at all
elements of our operating model to be able to get the savings out.
Good. Hey, thank you very much.
Yeah.
Cheers. Tracey?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, we see in the report that there's been a,
um, an increase in recreational, um, deaths.
And I appreciate the fact that those numbers always, um, potentially going
to ebb and flow a little bit.
Mm-hmm.
But from your perspective, um, have you had a look at what those kind
of key risks are and the, the specific sort of
causes? And are there any initiatives that you've been working
on-
Yes.
... or that you've put in place to address, um, any of
those, um, key risks or causes? Or, just tell us a little
bit more about the work that's going on in that space?
Yeah, sure. And, um, the numbers have stayed relatively static
over time, um, um, but we have seen increases in activity,
so we think we're still, um, a death, one death is still too
many, but we're actually seeing some impact.
Um, so the things that we're particularly focused on at the moment is that we
know that quite a lot of the deaths are happening close to shore.
So, we've got a big focus at the moment on initiatives around, um, ensuring that
people are aware of that. We're worried about bar crossings.
That's where a lot of the fatalities have happened.
Um, we've also, as you'll, you'll be aware, um, we've been very
keen on the wearing of life jackets.
We do know that over the last, um, 10 years of, um, people
have been wearing life jackets, the deaths would have been reduced by about
51%. Um-
Actually,
So, we, we run a whole raft of different things.
We've run behavior change campaigns-
(laughs)
... um, nationally. We, we also support those locally.
Um, we, uh, work a lot with MetService to
get messages out around safety and weather.
Um, we run a grants program where, where based on
our data and evidence, particularly around communities and risk areas,
um, we provide funding for, um, people to undertake
initiatives with those communities and report back on how they're delivering
against our strategy. Um, and we work really closely with, um,
harbor masters and regional councils on enforcement activity over
summer and education, um, campaigns on the water.
Yeah. And I think it's, I think the life jacket issue is just really-...
interesting because sometimes it doesn't feel all that rational that
people make decisions not to wear a life jacket.
Have, have you uncovered any kind of specific factors or, or trends or
patterns even, uh, according to geography, according
to, to any other demographics that would be
helpful?
Yeah, I think, um, uh, demographic learning around the life jacket
wearing, um, is that it is generally men over 40 years
old, um, that are more likely to not wear a life jacket and to
have fatalities.
Could I just comment too that, of course there's a, a different
approach depending on which harbor ma- you know, the different regional councils
have different approaches in terms of absolute requirements.
So Auckland, you're required to carry them, but in Northland, you're
actually required to wear them for s- for, for smaller vessels.
So you know, you do have that difference.
So is there anything sort of outside your control that could happen
elsewhere by other people that would help you in your
endeavor to reduce those numbers?
So I think, I think, uh, um, again, as you'll be aware, there's, there's
conversations around life jacket wearing, around boating standards,
around skipper licensing. Those have been lively conversations over the
last decade or more around, um, some of these issues.
Thank you. Simon?
Just, thank you, Ms. Ch- Um, just back on safety,
um, I'm interested in how Maritime New Zealand is
responding to the Transport Accident Investigation
Commission's investigations over the past few
years. Uh, we look at the, uh, Kaitiaki
Cook Strait New Groundroom, which the chair brought up.
Um, TAIKE said about Maritime New Zealand's role, um,
that essentially it had investigated, um, and
found that Maritime New Zealand, uh, should address critical safety issues that
hadn't been picked up in regular, uh,
audits. Um, it looks like an
alignment of the Swiss cheese. Um, obviously
the operator had poorly maintained equipment, um, but the
regulator had to be asked to step in and tighten up their
nationwide practices. So,
um, I'm interested as to how Maritime New Zealand has
responded to that and have you, uh, made any
changes, uh, to address
that?
Um, so, uh, I think, um, what TAIKE does is it,
um, pro- as you know, provides, um, system recommendations.
There is a system recomme- recommendation around a particular piece of
equipment. Um, they asked us to provide
more information around that particular piece of equipment and guidance.
Um, we have met that recommendation and fulfilled it.
So do you think that that, uh, was an oversight failure by
Maritime New Zealand, uh, in that that wasn't picked
up?
So, um, Maritime New Zealand will not, um, as part of its audit and
inspection role and nor will any other maritime regulator be looking at the
detail of equipment on board a vessel.
That is very much the operator that works with its class society,
um, that looks at stability and equipment on a vessel.
So what we do, um, is we will look at the systems,
um, safety systems and things in place.
Um, and the, the particular issue that's talked about there, um,
Kiwi Rail had not identified that as a critical piece of equipment,
um, and then put it on its safety system management.
Mm. But is there anyone at Maritime New Zealand who would know that Kiwi Rail
hadn't identified it? I mean, what's the point of being a safety regulator if you
don't know what's missing?
So, um, so again, um, what we will be looking at
is, um, how, how does Kiwi Rail think
about, uh, the maintenance of its equipment on
board its vessels, um, and ensuring that it's got good
processes in play. Um, we've been having conversations with
them before the Kaitiaki around some of those things, around maintenance and time
off
But like I g- I guess my question, who's checking the checker?
And isn't that Maritime New Zealand's job simply saying that you want to know
they've got a process in place? I mean, that sounds very, uh,
esoteric. Uh, people who travel on these vessels-
Yeah.
... want to know that not only is the operator maintaining them to a high standard
that they're safe, but the regulator actually knows what to look for.
So again, what we look for i- is part of the international
safety management system audit, is we look for whether
they've got safe systems and things in play, that the work that
we do is a point in time safety audit or
inspection that looks, um, across, um, a
sampling of different things. So yes, we are part of that Swiss
cheese model and we play that safety role and we do it in
relation to that, the system level,
not at the detailed element of an equipment on a vessel-
So, so, so would-
... which is done by the operator-
But just-
... with the-
Just-
... with the class society.
Thank you. Just to wrap that up, would there have been anyone at Maritime New
Zealand who would, in a technical role, who would have been able to
identify that Kiwi Rail did not have a
critical, uh, safety system or
element identified, uh, in their safety plan or
in the equipment that Maritime New Zealand is responsible for regulating?
So-
Would there have been anyone in your organization who could have identified that?
No.
Well, but the-
Is there a gap there?
Well, no, I don't think there is a gap, because the maritime inspections team, to
your point which you asked before, is made u- of mari- master
maritimes and master engineers. But what their role is not to do
is to go through an entire vessel and work out every element of critical
safety equipment on it. That is very much the role of the operator and the
class society. Our role is to ensure that they have
the safety systems or processes by, well, not to ensure, but to
a- to achieve the safety systems and processes.
So if they were not flagging that up as a critical piece of equipment, we would not
have been able to see it. What we did do after-
So if they don't tell you about a safety risk, you won't know there's a safety
risk. Is that what you're saying?
No, I'm saying that, um, if there is a particular piece of safety
critical equipment on board a vessel that they have not identified, we will
not always know that. That is very much what their role and responsibility is to
do.
I've also got a health and safety question, but it's on land.
Um, so you've become the, uh, as of first of July
2024, primary health and safety regulator for our
13 commercial ports. I just wondered, h- how is that going?
I mean, obviously there's been a history of, um, some issues in particularly in
some ports in terms of safety, and it's, it's, it's very, very important.
Mm-hmm.
How's that going? And also, you know, there are ...
different ports are considering what they do in terms of automation, right,
different techniqu- technologies, et cetera, using that.
Yeah.
What's your engagement with that process in terms of trying to make sure that
if there are changes that are made, they're done in a way which is, um, is
safe?
Yeah. Um, so I think we're really positive about how
the, um, designation has gone. Um, we d- we've
done a lot of work with the sector prior to, um, when we
took over the extension, um, from everything from
ensuring we had, uh, really good practice in relation to
notifications, working with the sector around going out and
engaging with the new PCBU's or operators we were working
with. Um, we've done a whole raft of
assessments over the year, um, to look at compliance
against the approved code of practice on loading and unloading of cargo,
again that we des- um, designed with the sector.
And we've worked really hard to take both an educative
approach, um, to thinking about how we work with
people to correct activities. So, we've been using something in particular called
a voluntary agreement. What that does is where there we see a safety
issue that's occurred, if the PCBU owns
that, um, and wants to improve th- in that area, then we work
with them, um, to make sure that they've done that, um, and assess
that they've done that. And so we don't use a formal slap, slapping them over the
hand with an improvement notice, where we think their attitude and their
understanding of safety and their willingness to change has been shown.
That's actually proven really effective for us.
We've seen quite a lot of safety changes, including, um,
PCBU's clubbing together to think about how they can work together better on
things like, um, loading of logs and on trucks in one
particular instance, which resulted in changes throughout New Zealand.
Um, and we, we also have the Port Health and Safety Leadership Group, which is
made up of port CE's, stevedores, unions and
industry body, and they have been nothing but positive about the work
that we have done. Um, and the bringing in of the designation.
So this sounds very much more like a sort of, we're walking alongside you approach-
Yeah.
... to health and safety, which I think is very commendable.
If-
Rather than a, "Hey, we'll wait till something goes wrong and then we'll slap
people." You know what I mean?
Perhaps-
Perhaps I could just add here, I think, I think that's a unique thing about the way
that we operate is, is as, in a collaborative leadership model, and I
think, uh, the Port Health and Safety Leadership Group, which Kirsty
chairs, is, is a really good example of that.
And, and it just means we can move very quickly because,
we can move with the sector if we're all clear about having a common
purpose. And as I mentioned earlier, we're doing that in the fishing
industry, we're doing it in the recreational boating industry, we're doing it in
search and rescue. So, um, it's the way we operate, and it's
just a, a much, um, more effective way of
operating, I think.
Okay. And, um, the other thing that I wanted to ask you, I did ask you there, is-
Yeah. ... the whole thing around, um, automation and-
Mm-hmm.
... changes of technology that ports are ... some ports are obviously considering.
Some ports have been there, decided not to do it. Other ports have done it.
Yeah.
How's, how ... What's your involvement in working alongside
ports that, and, and workforces that are, you know, looking to
do that?
Yeah. So I mean, I think that we, we strongly encourage
innovation if it will, um, remove safety
risk. So, you'll know with any kind of, um, safety risk,
you have to apply a hierarchy of control, so what's the best way to deal with the
safety risk? Um, I think one of the f- reasons why we
are seeing, um, a decrease in, um, health and safety incidents on
ports, um, particularly in the logging space, is that
companies like C3 or Cube have introduced a whole lot
of innovation, um, in relation to how they log loads
on vessels. And that has actually had some quite good payoff in relation
to safety incidents on ports. So yes, we work alongside and
we encourage safety innovation, but, um, um, with, with
people.
So, just to finish that off, and then I've got a few for Tracey.
Yeah.
So, if there's a major, um, change in a, in a given port or
ports, so they're going from one way of delivering the service-
Yep. ... to a completely different way of delivering-
Yep.
... the service in terms of automation of that service-
Yeah.
... how would you interface with that?
So we would... What we would do is we would hope, um, and we'll talk broader, I can
talk broader than ports, um, we would hope they would bring us early, um,
into the process when they're thinking about risk, um, um, automation, that
they're... when they're bringing in that automation, they're thinking about risk
management and controls, and then making sure that, um,
in doing that, they've thought about safety as a part of that, as well as the other
things that they're trying to deliver with it, efficiency, et cetera.
So you don't see any problems per se with doing it, it's
just bringing you in early and making sure it's done properly and done well,
essentially?
Yes. I mean, our role as the regulator is to ensure safety
outcomes. So, is ... if that's what, um, is being delivered through something, then
that's what we would be focused on.
Thank you. Tracey.
And just to sort of sup on that, um, perhaps one step further back
through the delegation and the voluntary agreements, but overall in general-
Yeah.
... how are you ... Is there a framework to capture all of
this?
Yes.
Because, uh, that sounds like it's something that we'd be really
interested, you know, to see-
Yeah. ... to monitor, that-
Yeah.
... to see that progress-
... 'cause it has, you know, this transferability.
Yeah.So, um, I think, um, we talk a lot about our
changed regulatory approach, so that is very much risk-focused.
So we, we really want good data on who's har- who's been
hurt, what are they being hurt, where, and importantly, why.
What's the driver behind it? Um, so it's very much trying to
get data from different parts of our sector, and what we collect to think about
where we target. And then we work, um, collaboratively with our
partners through those harm prevention programs that we just talked about-
Mm-hmm.
... to try and prevent harm from happening in the first place.
And then when it does happen, um, what we've been trying to do is deploy a
range of corrective enforcement tools, um, to
ensure we get the biggest bang for the buck, if that makes sense, on preventing
harm.
But we will still call to account and prosecute where we need to.
Yeah.
But, but specifically-
Yep.
... are there any measures that you've been able to, to develop to
quantify how well that walking with people-
Yeah.
... um, that change of designation, that voluntary, um,
status-
Yeah.
... works? So I know-
... that it's only just, sort of, those voluntary agreements have only just
started, so-
Yeah.
... for next year's annual review-
... we could have a bit of a-
Yeah.
... confound that on that?
So we, yeah, uh, we track numbers, but that doesn't answer your question, right?
And the reality is what we're trying to track over time, and we're dealing with
small numbers of fatalities, particularly in the commercial, is what is happening
with injuries and fatalities over time.
Um, where possible, we've done previously worker voice
surveys, so we understand what's happening on ports, and we get some, um,
insight from that.
We haven't done one recently. Um, and we also spend a lot of
time with the sector, um, thinking about case studies and impact and
qualitative, um, uh, (overlapping dialogue) measures around
that.
'Cause th- ou- the, the, the, the output or the, the dependent variable wouldn't
necessarily be deaths or anything like that.
There would be-
Yeah, there's a range of things.
...
Yeah.
So you have turned your mind to that?
Yes.
Okay.
Yeah.
Great.
Yeah, thank you. Can I just go back to, um, Dr.
McLellan's question earlier about the...
And this is in relation to page 22 and 23 of your annual report-
Yeah. ... about harm across the maritime sector.
Yeah.
The recreational fat- fatalities, you say, have remained, you know,
s- static. If we go back to 11 years ago-
Mm-hmm.
... 2014, '15, there was a significantly higher number
of... It was, it was 32.
Yes. Yeah.
Is that attributed to APEC? Like, why was that?
Um, so I know it's-
I can't remember that one, yeah. But I think what, what-
Right. ... we would say is this. Um, I think there's definitely years where
there's blips, um, where there, there's a significant, um, recreational
harm. A lot of people are killed on a vessel or something
happens. Sure.
I think over time, um, the work that we've done through our harm prevention
program, and actually recreational boating was our first one, has actually had
a real impact. And that's not-
Okay.
... just down to us. It's all our partners that work in that space.
A collective view.
Yeah.
That, that's fine.
Strategic view.
Um, my, my, my questions are around table one on page
23. Uh, and this talks about the range of corrective tools.
We've just heard about-
Yeah.
... the voluntary, um, agreements, which is a, a new initiative.
But the overwhelming number of tools, it seems to me,
that Maritime New Zealand use is, is simply what's framed as
observations. So what...
Like, in the last year, 1,116 is by
far the largest number.
Yeah.
So what actually, what actually is that?
And how is that-
Um-
... captured?
Yeah. So, um, so observations can happen through lots of
different interactions we're having.
So whether they're, we go out and do an assessment.
What we might say is, "You're not...
It's not that you're not complying with the law, but we would observe that if you
wanted to think about these kinds of improvements, you could." Or we are
doing an audit, um, and if they're, they're compliant with the
audit, but we'll give them an observation or something that's helpful to think
about in re- terms of safety. So the observa- observations are
still a tool, but they're for things where there's not, no compli...
You know, wh- where compliance isn't the issue.
What we're trying to do is leave something with, someone with some better
information or better off.
Okay.
Yeah.
So it's not that observations are defined in regulations or something.
No.
It's, it's a part of your normal day
approach to things?
Yeah, interactions.
How... I guess my question in that space then is how
is there a sense of consistency
around, around that? 'Cause it just seems a bit odd.
Yeah.
Like how is that captured? You come back to the office and someone records it in
the-
Yes.
... in the ledger that of observations?
Or how-
Yes. ... how is that formalized?
So we have a system of record. So for all of the
operators and PCBU's and everyone that we work with, they're in our system of
record. And we capture our engagements and interactions with them in
that. And that's what finds its way into our annual report.
We also have operational policies which clearly outline our regulatory
approach. So when would we use corrective enforcement tools?
When would do we use particular tools? When will we prosecute?
So that people are really transparent around why we're using which
tool, in which way. Um, both regulated parties and our
own staff, which we train against those operational policies.
So are all these, um, sort of data points mutually
exclusive?
Um, no, they're not. Sometimes we might, um, we
might, um, decide to investigate and prosecute but we'll still take
corrective action. So we might still-
Okay.
... do an improvement notice. Or if something...
If we go to somewhere and there is a real risk of harm, we
might put in place a, um, a prohibition
notice, and then still do another piece of work with someone once the immediate
harm has been fixed.
So the... Sometimes the suite of tools is used.
H- how do you sort of, um, capture the information around recidivist
offenders?
Yep. So, we, we capture that in two ways.
We capture that in our system of record, where we keep an eye on everything related
to people, um, and we, and, and we, and that would
include things like notifications on things that they've made, um, things that
have come out of audits and assessments.
If, uh, we see someone with a collection of too
many of them-
Yes.
... we might do things like a director's letter where we'll say, "Actually, we're
starting to notice that you've got, um, issues with your safety
systems, and we would like to have some conversations with you about
this, your safety systems, um, and what's going on here." And
actually, those letters are used infrequently, but often quite
powerful.
Okay.
Yes.
Simon?
Oh, Mr. Chair, thank you. Um, I just wanna come
back to, um,
capability, because it's something that, uh, stakeholders have
raised for me, with me a number of times.
I just wanna ask you about your diversity, equity, and inclusion
policy.
Um,
now, I understand that's important, but I'm
wondering, do you have a target for
capability
and competence that might mirror
or be at least as important as the things that you talk about in your
DEI policy?
Yeah. So, we have a capability strategy, so we look at where we want to deliver
as a regulator, the various capabilities we need across our
organization and what those skills look like, and then how do
we, how do we recruit and also develop people to deliver those
skills.
Okay. So, when you look at your capability against-
Yeah.
... organizational need-
... have you identified any gaps in competence?
Have we... Uh, uh, we... Uh, uh, a
little bit about the fact that I just talked about.
We're changing our regulatory approach, so that for us is very much
a,
um, a change in both culture and
understanding of how to think about how to apply that regulatory approach.
So, we've got quite a lot of training and development and focus on
supporting our own staff to make that change to a different way of carrying out our
regulatory approach.
So-
It's not a gap, but a, but a change in, in what we're expecting
and what-
Sure.
... and what we need to happen.
So, when you've got your organizational-
Yeah. ... role and functions-
Yeah.
... core competencies, uh, against them for staff-
... in each one of these very important safety-related roles, have
you developed a competency matrix that allows you to see
where those staff are in terms of their current capability and
competency, what the desired or, or
necessary level of competence is, and is there a gap?
So, I would say that if you're looking at an organizational level-
Mm-hmm.
... I think we have all of the right capabilities in the right places to enable us
to carry out our role. If you're looking at individual capability, that
is part of people's, um, performance expectations and
development plans, if there are any gaps in their capabilities that we're seeking
to-
Mm-hmm.
... increase.
And have you identified any gaps in individuals in critical safety
roles?
Um, I think, um, well, learning and development, it's
less about a gap. It's about where we bring people in at different levels, and
then how we move them through, um-
But-
... and build, and build their capability and increase-
Sure.
... their development over time.
I mean, I mean, you're, you're, you're regulating-
Yeah.
... significant-
... commercial-
Yeah.
... maritime sector-
... passenger vessels.
Yeah.
Um, you know, Transport Accident Investigation Commission has already
identified, uh, with Kaitiaki that, you know, Maritime New
Zealand did not, uh, identify a critical safety piece of
equipment. So, are you confident that in your
organization that the individuals carrying out
safety-critical, uh, monitoring-
... and regulatory functions, uh, have suitable competency, uh,
for the role?
Yes, I am. And, and to give you a sense of the people that carry out our
inspection function, um, just again, they are people who are
master mariners, naval architects-
Mm-hmm.
... um, master engineers, but they cannot carry out the ma- uh, maritime
inspections role until, um, they are completely
trained up in the international conventions and until we are
satisfied through training that they, um, have sufficient
experience in each of those commercial vessels to be able to look or inspect
those vessels. So, we are very, um, we have a very
stringent, um, capability and training plan around-
... maritime inspections and large vessel inspections.
Uh, is that something you'd be able to, uh, be able to provide to the committee?
Yes.
Your, um-
Yeah.
... uh, essentially, uh, operational functions, capabilities
in identifying, uh, ex- exactly, I
guess, um, if there are any gaps or if the, or, or what the
process is to achieve that competency?
Yeah. We can do it. They're, again, very different areas.
So, for large ships, we, we have maritime inspectors.
Mm-hmm.
For doing our domestic fleet, we have a whole capability program
before, um, we have maritime officers, um, for the
HAZWAT team, those are HAZWAT specialists.
So, we very much recruit to those different, um, functions.
Thanks. I think it'd be-
Yeah. ... really helpful-
Yeah.
... um, given the concerns that stakeholders have raised with me-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, that the committee could see that information. Thank you.
Um, so I've got a question, and do you have one as well, Trace? Okay.
So, look, the, um, two questions I've got.
First one of them is the, the $30 million which has been put aside through the
GPS for, um, coastal shipping and
coastal shipping-type facilities-
Mm-hmm.
... so some of them are the sort of land-based facilities,
does Maritime NZ have any input into the decisions which are made or provided
advice on those?
We had no input or we provided no advice into those decisions.
Okay, thanks. Yeah, that's clear. Okay.
Um, the other thing is that you, um, in your, uh, in your
report, yeah, you talk about the, um, your role in protecting the ma- the
marine, marine environment, uh, dis- preventing discharges
and also overseeing oil contingency spills. So, two parts to the question.
The first one, we've just had the Transport-...
regulations, sorry, the Regulatory Systems Transport
Bill, which, um, there were some submissions which were made on that.
And obviously we'll get your advice on that in terms of exclusion areas and so on,
so vessels don't run aground and cause
damage. So it's that bit. But the second bit is, uh, your systems,
particularly learning from examples like the Rena, et cetera-
Yeah. ... uh, your systems and the equipment to be able to
contain oil spills or anything-
Mm-hmm.
... of that nature, what do they look like and, and how do they-
Yeah. ... respond to an event? And how quickly do you get, you know, you obviously can't
be in every place at once, how quickly can you get them around the country,
basically, is my question.
Yeah, so I think, um, since the Rena, um, we've had something called the Oil
Pollution Levy, um, and that funds the readiness and
response, um, function for oil pollution response.
Um, what that funds is that we have, uh, in Te
Atatu, we have, um, in Auckland, we
have, uh, maritime res- readi- um, Readiness and
Response Center where we have a lot of the national kit that allows
us to respond to an oil pollution response.
Um, and we also train a lot of, um, regional councils and,
and, um, nationa- um, regional responders there as
well. Across the country, we also have, um,
bits of, um, oil pollution response kit
dotted, um, and, um, regional
councils, um, uh, play a key role working with us
at a regional level to mobilize that kit, and we train them on how to
use it. We also have a whole lot of contracts and a big red
button almost, um, that we push whenever, if there was a large major
event so that we could, um, deal with the first 48 hours
ourselves. But we also then can fly in kit from Singapore into
New Zealand, um, along with schools and other people to help
us, um, manage any kind of large events.
So we have insurance, we have other, um, resources
externally, and then we have national and regional kit to be able to do that.
So you'd say you're pretty well s- pretty well set up now-
Yeah.
... for anything that's foreseeable?
Yeah. Um, just in terms of, you said training regional councils, if there's a
change, which, you know, it looks as though it's quite likely in terms of the
structure of, um, regional councils, uh, does that
fall to the, does that then fall potentially to TAs or does it go to the ports that
are owned by, in large part by regional councils?
I, I don't think, um, the thinking about what will happen to the regional
harbormaster function has yet been done. So I can't, I can't comment on that.
Okay. No. That, that, that's fair.
No. I understand that. Yeah. Tracy, do you have a question?
Um, no. Thank
No. You're all good. Right.
Any other questions? All right. No? Otherwise, look, thank you very much.
Thank you for the work you do. Um-
Yes. ... and thanks, uh, for all the advice you've given on various different pieces of,
uh, both legislation and inquiry.
Mm-hmm.
Thank
you. Thank you.
you.
Okay. We'll take m- s- take a minute just to s- 30 seconds or so, just
to stand-
(silence)
Good
idea.
(silence)
Uh,
yep,
back on. Okay. Well, look, welcome.
It's the first time we've had you in front of us.
So if, um, you want to do some introductions, we've got a few bits of
information in front of us as well.
Um, but some intros, um, so any key points you want to raise over the next, uh, say
five or six minutes, and then we'll rip into some questions.
All right.
It's a new, it's a new area for us, so there may be some questions which are like
101 type questions, but we'll see how we go.
Right. Thank you, Chair. Um, thank you, members.
Um, my name's David Clark. I'm the chair and chief commissioner of the Transport
Accident Investigation Commission, or TAKE, as it's generally referred
to. On my left is our chief executive, Martin Sawyer,
Sawyers. And on my right is our general manager of corporate services,
Joeline Skelton. So TAKE
has, in effect, two roles. Uh,
first and foremost, it's an independent Crown entity established under its own act
with the powers and obligations set out in the Crown Entities Act.
But secondly, it's also a standing independent commission of
inquiry, again, established under its own act, but with the
powers of the Commissions of Inquiry Act.
So
we have those two roles in effect. Uh, Martin and his
team, uh, operate as the secretariat for the Commission of
Inquiry. And our primary role, in fact our sole role, is focusing on the
safety of transport within New Zealand.
Um, we look, as was identified in, during the
Maritime New Zealand presentation recently, we look at the systemic
issues, safety issues that impact the New Zealand transport
sector. And the, our purpose is to
learn and communicate those learnings
to the transport sector and others in order to primarily avoid
repeat accidents. And our, our, um, purpose,
our, um, is... and our strategy is
focused on no repeat accidents ever.
Uh, that's a, uh, that's a vision that we aspire to,
uh, that, as with all good visions, we aren't there yet, but we
continue to work towards it. Um-We
are independent and impartial,
and our investigations have some
specific, uh, characteristics that differ from the
investigations that might be undertaken by, uh, other
re- well, regulators within the sector such as the CAA, NZTA,
police, and Maritime New Zealand.
First of all, we have no powers of compliance or, um,
regulatory function. W- our recommendations are just that,
recommendations. We
require others to give effect to those, and so our focus in order to
achieve that is credibility, accessibility, and readiness,
so that when we make recommendations, they are listened to
and acted upon. And that is how we impact
the- the transport system.
Um, we exist
also to meet New Zealand's international obligations under
conventions in relation to maritime and, uh,
civil aviation, which both require independent investigative
bodies to investigate accidents and incidents.
And importantly, it's not just accidents we investigate, but also incidents which
haven't resulted in an accident but could.
And we apply certain criteria to the notifications we receive to determine
whether or not we will open an investigation.
The steps we take in an investigation, again, differ from a re- the
regulatory function. We are not looking to blame.
W- traditionally, investigative processes,
uh, looked until they found an individual who made a
mistake, and that was the end of the inves- uh, the investigation.
That was the cause. Much more modern techniques
recognize that humans are fallible.
Humans will make mistakes, and if the systems within which they operate can't
accommodate those mistakes, there's a problem with the system, not the
individuals. Now, on occasion, the problem does,
yes, begin and end with an individual, but what we find is much
more commonly it's the system that, uh, needs,
um, uh, improvement or changes
in order to accommodate the human factor within
it.
We've had some major organizational programs over the last couple of
years. Uh, one that we're o- we are continuing to work through at the
moment is our major accident planning, which we are at the moment
coordinating and adapting in order to, uh,
align with the, uh, Coordinated Incident Management System which is in
place in New Zealand so that we coordinate well with other
organizations who will be involved in, uh, accidents and incidents
in... or major accidents in New Zealand.
We have a unique position in that when an accident happens,
TAKE, through its legislation, has primacy over the site
and the evidence that's collected there.
So, we also have arrangements with all the other organizations, police, Maritime
New Zealand, CAA, NZTA. We have MOUs in place with
them to coordinate our roles in the event of an accident and
also to provide assistance to each other while at the same time maintaining
our independence.
Uh, we've also embedded a new case
management system that we received funding for in about
2021, '22 that has enabled us to
become more efficient and effective in the way in which we produce reports and
coordinate our evidence. It's allowed us to
move
a considerable distance in relation to the Digital First strategy, along with
our recently released update to our website, which is now much more
accessible to operators and the public to find our
reports, to assess them, to understand what we're, what we're saying and the
recommendations we're making.
It's important for us also to, as a, an organization,
to recognize that our
impact is not just in the recommendations and the reports we
produce. Sometimes the most effective safety impact we have
is commencing an investigation and communicating with the people
involved during that investigation.
So, we don't wait 'til the publication of our
report to let people in the sector and those involved in the
accident know what the safety issues were.
We're communicating with them throughout the investigative process.
And perhaps another
mechanism of looking at our effectiveness is to identify in our reports the
number of safety issues identified that do not result in
recommendations because the safety actions taken during the course of the
investigation have resolved those issues.
And that's important because sometimes our reports can take some time to
come out because of the complexity of the
accident and the issues involved because, again, we look system-wide.
We're not restricted to the particular accident or incident if it reflects a
broader issue that might be common with other incidents and accidents.
So, there can be some time between the incident
and the publication of our report.
So, to ameliorate that risk that, that those issues
don't get addressed, we do communicate them.
We also on occasion issue interim or preliminary
reports. We also make urgent recommendations on occasion
which aren't published but which are directed to the relevant
regulatory bodies to take action.
Our performance and our, our role is really demand-driven.
We can't control
the number of accidents and incidents, and, and in a perfect world, we'd
have investigators sitting around waiting for something to happen.
That doesn't occur. We're a lean, small organization that is
focused on efficiency and effectiveness, and Martin
and Joe and their teams have done an amazing job over the last
few years of ensuring that we can operate with a f- within the fiscally
constrained, uh, environment that we operate in, and
that we can continue to operate for the next couple of
years despite increasing costs within our organization that
everybody's facing.Uh, that was all I wanted
to say as a, as an introduction to give you a sort of a jaw...
broad view of us and our role. So, happy to-
No, thank
you- ... take any questions.
Thank you for that, David. That was, uh, that was very, very interesting to start
with as well. Um, look, can, um, I start off with a,
a, a question-
(clears throat)
... just in terms of the, um, sort of the process?
So you, you've got an incident, you do an investigation into the incident.
You may, you make some recommenda...
You may, may make some recommendations along the way with some, uh, advice to
whomever needs to do something about it.
Um, do you keep a good record of what, um, you've
both advised and also what recommendations you make, and are able to see that
those are acted, act, act- actually acted upon?
So we, we do keep a record of them.
Yeah.
But we-
(clears throat) ... do not have the statutory power- I understand that bit, but it's, it is the
people are taking your, your advice and saying, "Yes, the
TAIC has said do something here," and they've acted on it.
In other words, you, you don't have a tail of things which have not been acted
on.
We... When we make recommendations, we request a
response from-
(coughs) ... the regulator or operator or the, the recipient of-
... those recommendations.
And they can, uh, accept the, the three options we provide
them: accept, reject, or under consideration.
So once we have that, we do have that information, and we have
also, under a previous minister, been asked to coordinate
responses on an annual basis from regulators
as to the status of recommendations.
(coughs)
So we can provide that and do provide that to the minister,
but that's not something we have any statutory authority to
do-
I understand that.
... or to assess whether what they've done has met the
recommendation.
Oh, so you don't even, you don't even do that bit of, um, of assessing-
(clears throat)
... of saying they've responded in a particular way, have they actually done what
we think they should have done? But you do, you do provide information on an
ongoing basis to the minister to say... Just take that out of there.
Sorry, um, uh, to say, "Hey, this is the state of the, the
recommendations that we've made. They... These have been acted on.
These are, we're still, they're still under consideration.
These won't be for some."
Yes, as the response, but the w- the two exceptions to
that are if actions are taken during the course of our investigation, we will
assess those-
(clears throat) ... to determine whether the recommendation that we would have...
So we might have a recommendation in a draft report-
Yeah.
... that we then receive, through submissions, sufficient evidence to satisfy
ourselves that we no longer need to make that recommendation.
(clears throat)
Uh, the other, um,
situation is that, uh, if another
incident arises that we... that may have similarities, we may, in that
sense, look again at the work they've done to determine whether that
recommendations has, uh, been acted on.
Uh, a good... A recent example is,
uh, our Eye Catcher report.
Sorry, the-
Our Eye Catcher report-
Yeah. Yeah.
... which was a, a tragedy off the coast of-
Ah, Kaikoura.
... Kaikoura.
Yeah.
We issued an interim, preliminary, and urgent recommendation
around, um, inspection of fuel
systems. Between that interim report and our
final report-
(clears throat)
... the actions taken meant that, by Maritime New Zealand, meant that
we did not need to repeat that recommendation in our final report.
So we had another opportunity to assess the, the, uh, actions
taken.
So d- um, sorry, my last question, then I've got a, um, a supplementary-
Sure.
... out here. Uh, so do you note it...
So, in your report, just for completeness, do you also note-
(clears throat)
... these were areas that we had concerns.
These have been addressed by whoever it needs to be, Maritime New Zealand in this
case. Um, these are our recommendations for other things which have not yet been
dealt with?
Yes.
So basically, correct? Yeah, okay. No, cool. Dan?
Yeah. Um, so I understand. I guess what we're trying to get to is
kind of where, where, what's the outcomes of your
work and I'm just wondering whether you, um, your organization
has, um,
thought about publishing that on a more regular basis publicly rather
than just to the minister. But, you know, um, you make 15
recommendations or 100 over a year, um,
coming back (clears throat) and looking at, well, you made those two years ago.
Um, knowing that you don't have a statutory obligation or anything,
but it would be helpful, I think, for, I guess,
particularly, um, parliamentarians to understand
what is the outcomes of the, of... whether they're, they're actually
acting on the stuff that you recommend.
Yeah. There, there would be a question whether we have the statutory-
(clears throat)
... power to publish that because, at the moment, it's being provided to us
under the min- ministerial direction-
(clears throat)
... to the organizations and it's simply their response.
Mm-hmm.
Now, they may be happy for that to be published and that's really a question
for the minister if that... because that information is collected for the minister
and provided to the minister. We're effectively just a conduit because
while in previous years, some years ago,
TAKE did follow up to see what, uh, had happened
with, um, recommendations, it became clear that that was beyond-
(clears throat)
... outside its power and so it could not continue to do that, which is the
genesis of the minister's direction at the time.
Okay. No, I understand. Do you want to get into my prompt or no?
Oh, no, no, I'll go.
Yeah.
So, so just to, to, to complete that bit, so it would be something that the
committee could... Would, would you think it would be desirable to make those
things, um, more transparent and in other words more public on a
periodic basis?
There may be value to that. One of the issues though is whether there's value in
simply publishing what, uh, the response is as opposed
to the actions and whether those actions hit their bit.
I see.
(clears throat) That would require significantly more resource
to be able to make any, uh, sensible analysis
of the information.
Yeah. Okay. Okay. I had two sups over here, Tangi and, and,
Yeah.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you. It's good to see you-
Sup?
... taking this, having seen you-
Yeah. ... this term in Parliament-
No worries.
... which is, so it's all good. Um, I think you said that the
response that would come back in terms of what the recommendations would be would
either-
(clears throat)
... accept, reject, or under consideration. Is that correct?
Correct.
Yeah. So if-
If the response is under consideration, is there still a
role for the commission, for example, if there's more
information, or is it that you make the recommendations and that is
the end of the matter? I take your most recent response that, you know, that was
suggested it was going beyond the commission's remit.
But if there's more detail, further information that the minister or the agency
or whoever, the regulator, might want
from you, is there still a- an avenue for that to happen?
No. Once our report is published, that's the end of our remit in
relation to that incident. So, that we could only look at those
issues and, and analyze that data again in the context of another
incident or accident.
So, is, is there, in your process, um,
when you, when you publish that report, is that the first time
that the agency will see that? Or is there something in your process
so that they will know that these are the draft recommendations and therefore
they could give some input into understanding what it is if there is a need to
understand?
Yeah, there are, there is. There are, there are two main ways.
One, during the course of the investigative process our investigators
will be discussing safety issues that have arisen.
They won't be able to discuss recommendations because recommendations
are solely the province of the commission and the commissioners, but they
may discuss that, the, the potential shape.
But there is always a draft. In every report, a draft is
provided to all interested parties, including those which isn't limited to
those people who are the subject or recipient of ???
So, they will have seen the draft recommendation and will have had an opportunity
to submit on it.
She's with Tracy.
Um, I thank you. I think you've largely answered my question.
I have two wanted to look at. Wanted to ask, you know, how do
we, how do we systematize lessons learned, changing the unit
of analysis from an individual investigation or case study
essentially into the wider group.
But as you've pointed out, um, statutory obligations and
resourcing is, is as the old age, age old question,
isn't it? Is there anything else that's preventing us...
The, the other thing we do do periodically, the commissioners consider, and the
commission does publish a watch list.
So, if it's seeing through a series of inquiries, a
trend-
Right.
... it, it will call that trend out.
So, for instance, um, the current watch list,
um, contains a lot of information about fatigue being something that we,
see across a number of industries.
So, even acting as a prompt for other people, um-
Yeah.
... to be able to pick up those trends.
It's a way for the commissioners-
... to record what they consider to be the biggest safety concerns from
all, all the transport modes.
Okay.
Very useful. Carlos? In the front row.
Yes. I just, um, really appreciate the transparency of your agency
because when I look at your website, basically every single incident, no matter
major or minor, you put it on the, um, on, on the internet for the
public to actually look through it.
So, um, I, I think that's, that's pretty good.
Like, and, and, and I can look at this, uh, most of them are quite interesting as
well, you know, from the sky to the, to, to the sea, um, minor to major
incident. But my question is, how many cases are still
under investigation for more than two years now?
That's a great question. So, it might...
Our, our statutory performance target is
70% within 440 working days, which is
two years.
Two years.
I think for 2024, 74%
were completed within that time. Do you have the
specific numbers?
Um, I, I don't have the specific numbers, but we're similar for the current year as
well. So, we have reduced, um, time
frames.
So, this is 74% need to be resolved within two
years of time periods?
Yes.
So, what is the, the longest one still under investigating at the
moment? The longest period?
Right, right now, um, it's probably the Kaitaki
report, but that, that report,
uh, we, we did produce an interim
report along the way. So, if, if, if during the course of an
inquiry we see something that we think's an urgent safety
issue, we will raise that with the affected
parties, with the regulator or with the operator.
Uh, but in addition, if we don't think there's been action,
sufficient action taken, we will also, or we think there is a need
to share that with, uh, the wider public and, and the
industry, we will actually publish an interim report.
And in this case, the commission published an interim report.
So, I understand that there's a lot of factor will, uh, determine how
long does it take for investigation, but what's the major challenge why some of the
report are, are way longer or take too long to, to, to
complete?
So, what we've... Might be useful to talk a
little bit about a new structure we've introduced to
allocate, uh, investigations when they come in and we, we will
reassess them. So, we now have, um, four levels of report
instead of just a single. Well, major, which is a significant
nationally relevant, uh, um, event that would
have, would involve many other agencies.
Complex, uh, is the next level. Complex would
require, uh, significant resource from, with
intake and probably external as well.
A lot of issues associated with, uh, a number of
participants within the organization or systems which are in
and of themselves very complex. So, air accidents, for example, or
incidents tend to be highly complex because of the machinery involved
and the confluence of issues that have created the particular
incident. Uh, then we have our standard, uh,
which, um, is, as the name suggests, what we would expect a
reasonable and sensible usual level of resource commitment.
Uh, and then, uh, limited scope where we see that there is a very
simple single issue, perhaps here might be systemic, but there's very little else
involved.And so, what we're looking at really is the
time and the resource likely to be involved in order to
achieve the outcome, and the time and resources driven
by the complexity, which is a component of
the systems involved, but also the number of other, uh, entities that
have touched on that incident.
Mm-hmm. Martin?
Can I just a- ask a follow-up question, just for a quick look, quick, um, scan
for the draft, because you mentioned the Kaitaki is a particularly long one.
Um, so you issued a draft report on that.
Um, just as- as an illustration, so the draft report talks about
critical equipment or component failures.
Um,
so what- what do you do with that in terms of recommendations?
Presumably, that recommendation, so in this case it would be Kiwi Rail, will go,
"Okay, we've got an issue there so we should be doing some fixing." But it goes to
also to Maritime New Zealand in terms of their regime
to monitor the, Kiwi Rail in this case.
Yeah, that's right and- and we do spend a lot of time in commission deciding
where a recommendation- recommendation is most appropriately
directed. So, in that case, recommendation to
Maritime New Zealand, because of the structural system within which we operate,
where Maritime New Zealand is responsible for approving safety systems, but there's
a lot of reliance on the operators to work to
those-
Of course, yeah.
Um,
Maritime New Zealand becomes the right entity to
ensure that those things are being done and that
the, um, the recommendation is implemented.
So, they have the statutory power
to communic- well, they have the role to communicate and the statutory power
to ensure that it's done. So those recommendations were
about, um, communication and then
requiring Interisland to provide the evidence
to demonstrate that the work had been done.
So your- your recommendations generally go to the regulatory bodies,
so CAA, um, Maritime New Zealand, NZTA, these-
Often but not solely, to operators as well, yes, yeah.
Oh, okay, right. So, but th- will they always go to the- the regulator as well as
an operator, potentially?
Largely, but not always. Yeah.
Okay. So sometimes they'll just go to an operator?
Sometimes it's just an operator issue-
Okay.
... and it- it doesn't reflect any sort of broader systemic issue.
It'll be a system issue within the operator's framework-
Yeah.
... not the broader New Zealand frame.
Okay, thank you. Um, Simon?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to come back to, um,
Maritime New Zealand's use of the commission's work.
So looking across your recent maritime inquiries like Chanters,
Kaitaki, um, the Schilling, um, do you see any
recurring themes about how Maritime New Zealand is
performing its regulatory role? And what
extent do you think Maritime New Zealand is learning, uh, from
the themes or patterns you've
identified?
Our- our recommendations to Maritime New Zealand
are- are identifying those risks in the system and
my...
Maritime New Zealand accepts our
recommendations, so I can't think off the top of my head of a time they haven't
been accepted. And they,
my experience, our experience is that they accept them and take
action. So, uh, we- we have not identified a
systemic lack of engagement or lack of
responsiveness to our recommendations or to safety issues
by Maritime New Zealand.
So, um, it's all very well they accept them.
How many of the recommendations, uh, to Maritime
New Zealand remain open or only partially
implemented?
We don't monitor the implementation of those
recommendations because, as I said, we previously, in previous years,
Taked did, but then it became apparent that was beyond our remit.
We didn't have the power or authority to do that, to seek information or to
assess it.
So in terms of checking the checkers, um, having made a
recommendation, are you saying that you don't necessarily follow
up, uh, to see if it's been implemented?
No, we don't have that authority. Again, what we can do
is, and what we will do, is, um, if
that
recommendation were relevant in a s- subsequent incident, we would
assess the activity that would've taken place.
But we are, in that sense, reactive, though
as Martin mentioned, we have a watch list which, if we are seeing
trends that concern us, we can raise them in the watch list
for more, uh, um,
awareness, both publicly and with regulators and- and that
issue or the lack of engagement on our
recommendations is not an issue that we see as
one that's not- is not on our watch list.
Okay, so- so
maybe it's just a lack of clarity about who is
responsible. Um, so in your opening remarks, you
said the purpose of your organization or one of your goals is to make sure the same
accident doesn't happen again. Now, I would assume that if, uh,
systems failure or process failures are identified and
you tell Maritime New Zealand, um, you want to make sure it doesn't happen
again, that some part of the
safety system would be monitoring to see if that
recommendation was taken up. So, if it's not the commission, then
who is it?
Uh, there- there isn't anyone doing that.
Wow, okay. So there may...
So- so there may well be recommendations that haven't been fully implemented,
but you wouldn't know...
That's correct.
... until it happens again?
That's correct. Our- our only ability to influence
that is being credible
and provide it being seen as the voice of safety and
having our recommendations treated in the same way that, for example, an
ombudsman's recommendations are.
Though the ombudsman has the ability to lay a report before Parliament, which we
don't.
Is this something you've raised with the minister?
Uh, in previous, uh, parliamentary terms
it has been, but not this term.
Do you think it's worthwhile raising with the current minister?
'Cause it does sound like there's a gap.
I mean, if a regulator is saying, "Here's a
recommendation." But there's no statutory mechanism or
no (laughs) , no clear, um (clears throat) , task allocation to make
sure it's completed, it could potentially just sit out there for years and who
would know?
Mm-hmm.
Yeah, that... I mean, that is something that, as I say, TAFE previously did.
It was determined there wasn't the power to do it, it was outside its remit.
Mm-hmm.
So, that has fallen away and the...
what's left is the ability to... or the...
the re- the request from the minister to coordinate the responses.
But again, those are just the responses, not the actions taken.
Mm-hmm.
But to actually analyze the actions taken is
almost another investigation in and of itself there, so there's a considerable
resource. 'Cause what happens when, for example, we, we
go through a process and safety actions are taken by the...
the... the, um, entities who might otherwise receive a recommendation?
Those safety actions have to go through the same analysis that the
original, uh, fact pattern did in order to see
whether or not that has, in fact, solved the issue.
Sure.
So, the safety issue's ass- assessed, then they, through
a... a... a review of the... the then current circumstances.
(clears throat)
And then the whole process would start again to assess those actions and see what
gaps were left.
Sure. But I mean, isn't that what organizations with...
responsible for safety-critical activities do? They...
They receive a recommendation, they, uh, see if they can
implement it or whether they can do something different to address the risk, and
then they close it out.
But if you're not, um, in the position of being able to confirm it's
been closed out, then potentially it still sits out there.
Is that something you think is worthwhile raising with this minister, given it was
a function you had before, you were monitoring it, uh, you were recording in
some way, you're no longer doing it?
Do you think it's worth raising with the minister?
Uh, it's worth discussing with both MOT and the minister, I'd say.
But whe- whether or not that... where that fits in a...
in a, sort of, regulatory change environment is another question-
(clears throat)
... and not one for us.
The... The ministry are aware of the issue and... And it...
You know,
because this issue came up probably four years ago-
Right.
... when we... we determined it, so the ministry are aware.
It would take legislative change-
Okay.
... for the minister, for, uh, TAFE to have that
responsibility.
Yeah.
And to be fair, it would also take ph- uh, extra funding,
probably, to allow us to do it.
Yeah. Um, do you think it's important that some actor in the system
does do it?
Like closing out-
Yeah.
(laughs) ... closing out the action or the recommendation in the risk register?
If there are concerns that it's not being done, absolutely.
If you can... The... The way we have to operate in the environment is to
have the credibility and authority that people will do it when we say, and
part of our process at the moment is to build that profile.
We have to operate within the framework we've got, right?
I understand.
Yeah.
But, um... But I mean, it sounds like it's a trust
model, that you make a recommendation and you trust
whoever is responsi-... whoever the recommendation is to, to do it.
Yeah.
Uh, but there's no corresponding closeout.
So, do you think, given you've said that it is worth talking to the ministry and
the minister about, that you will follow up?
Y- yes. I mean, we... We will continue to those discussions.
Um, and-
Excellent. So, if we come back around next year and I ask you, "Have you followed
up with the minister about this gap?" and that you're making recommendations
but there's no, uh, follow-up to see if they've been implemented or closed out,
uh, will you be able to tell me in a year's time that, um, that action's been taken
and some work's been done to actually, uh, make sure
this... this, I guess, hole in the Swiss cheese is...
(laughs) is closed?
Well, I... I can't commit to the work that will be done.
That would be MOT would be-
Oh, but then you will raise it.
... undertaking that work. I... I'm, yes, very comfortable raising it.
Excellent. Oh, well, I look forward to, um, hearing...
hea- he- hearing about how that conversation goes next year.
Simon... Simon, I'd also note we have to write a report.
Quite.
So, we may do that-
We can... We can-
... when... When... We... We m-... we have the opportunity to raise it then too.
I... I... I will be-
So... So, don't worry about
I... I think that... I think that that's... it's a loud and clear thing.
Um, so just to fi-... to finish off that and then I'll go to...
I think, Dan, you had a-
Yeah.
... primary and then Tangi had a primary as well.
Um,
do you have any... uh, no... no awareness whatsoever once you've said,
"Here's our report, here's our recommendations," do you have no awareness
whatsoever, you know, e- in
the informal conversation that happens, whatever it might be, of whether
your recommendation's been acted on?
Uh, not in a formal way, but we monitor and
look for input from our... So, at every commission meeting there's an update
on actio-... on... on, uh, environmental factors that have
happened. Looking forward, sometimes that will come up so,
for example, uh, a recommendation, uh, something's come up in the
media that an action has been taken by an operator that
relates-
(coughs)
... to one of our recommendations or whether...
whether directly or it impacts the safety issue that we identified.
So, we... We can become aware of them in that sense, but we don't
and we can't go out and ask the question.
Yeah. Yeah, so being able to do... go out and...
and ask the question saying, "Hey, have you acted on what we've said?" would be-
No.
... really useful.
Yeah.
Okay. And... And importantly the, um, as...
as the Chief Commissioner said, the...
the parties are self-reporting-
Yeah.
... whether they've accepted, rejected or-
Got that. Got that back.
So, they're reporting that.
Yeah.
So, that might change from year to year. They might say, "Well, now we've..." It...
It might have been under consideration.
The following year they might say, "Well, we've accepted and implemented it." But
we don't go and check whether that's taken place.
But you keep it... You... You at least have a record of... of...
of... of accepted, under consideration-
Yes.
... and rejected?
Yeah, so you keep that record, just not what they've...
when they've said, "We accepted it."
And we haven't checked they've actually done something with it.
Yeah. Yeah. You... You haven't got... Okay, cool.
Thank
you. And I... I think if I could just add to that.
Yeah.
The other thing that we really focus on is that point I made earlier, which is, a
real success is a safety issue that's identified but resolved during the course of
the report.
Mm-hmm.
So that those are actions that-
They do note.
... we can assess and we do look at.
Mm-hmm.
In one sense you could say that
recommendations are a-... the recognition that we haven't had enough
influence on the way through. It may not be an influence issue.
It might be simply the size of the issue.
You know, the transport sector is a, a complex, um,
loosely coupled system where things move slowly and, and an
action in one area can take some considerable time to give effect
in another. And you might, if you were to read our reports, you'd see in some
instances
we'll record a safety action
that, if it had been completed, would have dealt with the recommendation
but is underway, and so we still keep the recommendation in because
it hasn't been completed, uh, still.
I see. So just, just on that, just to finish that, and then I'll go to Dan.
So you, you at least have a record of the things which you've been...
as you go through the process, you're engaging with the parties, the relevant
parties, you get to draft report, uh, any of those
stages before you actually make the final report, any of those stages of, of
say, okay, we've dealt with that or we are dealing with that, you're keeping a
record of that so you know actually?
Yes.
'Cause I mean, at the end of the day, most of these things are about making a
difference, aren't they?
That's correct, yep.
Yeah, yeah. Cool. Dan?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, just a slightly different tactic.
I found your annual report very informative, um,
just in terms of your process and how you arrive at your, your
investigations. Just, uh, a couple of questions.
First is, so CAA gets thousands, you say,
of complaint or, or incidences, and they only give you about
200 a year. Um, does that mean to say that the
rest, uh,
don't comply or don't meet the
criteria that, you know... W- what is that, um,
criteria?
So, so there's certain, certain incidents reach the, um,
categorization of being notifiable.
So that's notifiable under usually the international convention,
um, they have to be notified to take also under our
legislation.
Mm-hmm.
And that's, that's the 200. But at the end of the month, we will also
get a summary from CAA of all the incidents they've
received, so we actually can monitor the in- the incidents as
well.
Yeah, and then from the 200, you choose kind of, you know, a few
that you're gonna target for-
Yeah.
... investigation?
Um, yeah, so we're looking for trends.
Yeah.
So if, if we're notic- if we're noticing a trend, we then might say, "Right, we're
gonna wait for the right incident to occur where we think it'll be broad enough
that we can look into the issues and then report to the commissioners."
Yeah.
Um,
we are also, um, you know, there are certain incidents, though, that, or
accidents that if they occur, they probably always will reach the threshold of
where we'd open.
Yeah.
So, you know, u- usually if it's a commercial aircraft, for instance,
um, if, you know, we're, we're probably going to investigate if, if,
if there were, you know, serious injuries or death that, that
also triggers when we might actually look at it as well.
Yeah. And out of those kind of handful that you choose, is it fair to say that
there are other organizations doing very similar,
uh, reviews, whether it's CAA, whether it's-
Yeah.
... um, you know, other ministries or-
So, so everyone's doing their own, well, potentially doing their own
investigations.
Mm-hmm.
The regulator and the police will be very much enforcement and
regulat- regulatory compliance focused.
Um,
we're the only organization that does a systemic safety investigation,
so we're looking to identify what was the primary cause
of, of the accident or incident but more importantly, what were the systemic
issues that contributed and allowed that to actually occur?
Yeah, okay. So y- you're really the only...
That's your sweet spot, is, uh, looking at the safety and-
It, it's the deep dive. I mean, it can be very interesting to know that,
um, a person made a mistake, you know?
Yeah.
That, that's the primary cause of an accident.
But the more important question from our perspective is, why did that
person make a mistake?
Yeah.
What, what, what was the training? What was the coaching?
What was the mentoring? What were the systems of supervision and stuff that
sat behind that?
So, what I'm hearing from you today is that there's, there's probably, uh, a
space around enforcement and your powers of enforcement and
then monitoring-
Don't have any.
... is...
Well,
There seems to be two gaps here, is that-
Well, no enforcement powers.
No, which is why-
And-
... I'm saying there are gaps.
Well, th- they're two different things, though.
So if w- y- you can, um...
Recommendations, it might be useful to monitor them,
but our recommendations aren't enforceable, so the- there's
no... You know, they're not mandatory.
They're not enforceable in any way.
Mm-hmm.
So I think an important point about our safety investigations is, uh,
it's colloquially known as no blame, but it doesn't mean we won't
identify when someone's done it. But our processes are
confidential and based on natural justice.
But when... Our reports can't be used in any court or any,
any, um, uh, tribunal other than the coroner's
court. So when people talk to us, they
understand that they're not at risk of prosecution.
They're, the, the information they give us is confidential and isn't shared
so that we can get the best information and dig into the
safety issues.
Mm-hmm. Okay, thank you.
(clears throat)
Taika?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, David, you describe the organization as a
lean, small organization. So how do you,
um, deal with the sort of breadth of issues that,
that crop up,
um, given the broad nature, I guess, of what
might be investigated?
Yeah, so (clears throat)
our workload is lumpy because it's demand-driven, but it also
is, uh, capacity constrained. So
we can't investigate everything, and so we have to make careful
decisions about even if something might m- meet the
criteria, do we have the current capacity?
Or if we don't, is it an important enough or potentially important enough,
um, investigation that we'll put something else on hold?
Which is another reason sometimes, um, investigations are
delayed in the production of the final report. So-...
uh, the chief investigator of accidents, um, uh, Louise Cook
and Martin spent a lot of time thinking about resource allocation
for that very thing because we need to produce
between 17 and 25 reports according to our performance, uh,
expectations. And so, we have to keep doing stuff,
but we actually h- also have to be ready to drop things to take on a
major accident or a significant-
Right.
... investigation.
So, so the nature of your team, are they, for example, from fields of
maritime and aviation and, and the like?
Yes. We've got a lot of subject matter experts who have been, uh, you
know, engineers on commercial, um, going vessels,
uh, open ocean vessels. We have former, um, jumbo
jet, 737, um, A380 pilots.
Uh, we have former, um, uh, locomotive engineers, both
drivers and, um, engineers who h- worked on that.
So, we have that, but also, the nature of, um,
investigative, um, skills is changing a little bit as
well, so becoming more and more important are the human factors people and the
data analysis people.
And so, the traditional accident
investigator who comes off the train or off the flight deck, they're
not the only ones we want now. We also want people with those other
skills. And another way in which Martin and, and the
chief investigator accidents operators, our investigators,
while notionally within modes, so rail, air, and,
um, marine, they do operate across modes as well because there's a
commonality of investigative process and, um, and
experience that can be brought to bear.
So, in terms of your international o- obligations, I see from
your annual report, um, you've identified the, um,
Table 8, the number of international inquiries that you have
assisted with over the last 12 months or so.
But I also saw from, I think from your, um, sort of
front-ending comments were that there's a role, for example, if it's a New Zealand
flagged vessel or aircraft or a New Zealand
fatality has, um, has
resulted, w- what is,
in foreign jurisdictions, how does that work in terms of your
ability to
pick up responsibility?
Mm-hmm.
Do you
wanna start with that one, Martin? Yeah, so... So, when, um... Usually it's in a, in
an a- assist capacity. So, um, if it was a New Zealand
flagged vessel, um, we would have a right to
participate, which means we get a, uh, an opportunity to comment
on the report. Um, with some of those, though,
we're just assisting overseas people investigate things that have occurred
in New Zealand with their vessels.
So, for instance-
Okay.
... uh, they might say to us, um, "Could you go and gather some evidence for us
in New Zealand that relates to this accident that's occurred at, at the h-
in the high seas?" So, for example, um,
there was one vessel that departed New Zealand.
Um, we gathered evidence on behalf of the investigator about,
uh, what had occurred when the vessel was in the New Zealand port.
So, we gathered that evidence on their behalf.
So, so the reference on the table here about an incident in South
Sudan, for example, that would be...
Uh, that would probably, from memory, that is a,
um, an aircraft where I think it had, uh, operated in New Zealand
at some point.
Okay.
So, I think we were potentially assisting with gathering some evidence about its
maintenance and stuff while it was in New Zealand.
Thanks.
Um, one last question from me. Uh, the, um...
You did mention the one court that you do get involved and I didn't think about
that earlier, was Coronial Court.
Just tell us how the, how that works, that, that they're able to use
your, um-
Yeah.
... information. How, to what extent, if there are double ups in the, the, the-
Well-
... you know, what they're looking at and what you do and-
So, yeah-
... the efficiency of the system.
... the only involvement, we don't appear in a Coroner's Re- Court, uh, court.
But they are able to use our report.
Uh, there's actually an efficiency in it.
Yes, that's what I was looking for.
So, they have been, yeah, there have been occasions where the coroner has
determined there was no requirement to hold a coronial inquiry because TAKE had
dealt with all the issues. And so, that's a saving to the New Zealand
system. In other cases, the coroners refer,
uh, to our report as the basis of evidence, so there's
less need... And they may test some of that, but it can be
more efficient and, um, so we see that as a, as a
positive for the sector.
I- is that... That's a unique position for TAKE?
I mean, there is no other, um, entity that the Coronial Court uses in the same
way?
Uh, I can't answer that.
Okay. No, fair enough. I guess that's, yeah, probably unreasonable. Okay.
No, thank you. Really appreciate that. Um, any other questions?
One last one.
Quick one.
Uh, so it's been, what, um, 35 years since your, um-
Yeah. ... organization was set up and the legislation was enacted. Any...
Have, have you provided advice to the minister or
to this committee in the past around maybe updates to the legislation to
modernize, make sure it's relevant and gives you, your new
organization,
uh, the, uh, powers and authorities and bandwidth to
what you need to do well?
We, we have, um, provided the
ministry with a list of things that when our legislation is
reviewed, um, that we think should be updated.
Okay.
Uh, and we actively maintain that list.
So, as we, as we're dealing with cases and the, uh, either ourselves as
a secretariat or the commissioners identify issues, we keep a note of those.
And from time to night- time we meet with policy people at the ministry and make
them aware of that, that wish list, if you like.
Okay. And that wish list hasn't eventuated, I'm guessing,
or...
Um, I'm... I'm not aware of-
You know-
Our legislation hasn't been reviewed in my time.
But I can only speak about the last four and a half years.
Thank you.
Any other questions? I just have one other one.
Please.
Your response indicates that you are looking at AI in two areas.
One is transcription and the other is sort
of reviewing previous inquiries
to gather information.
Is that the full extent of where things are heading or how are you
sort of aligning operations with
evolving and ever-changing technology? So no, it's not the end.
It's just the very beginning. And we've developed
an AI policy to ensure that as we move forward, it's done
safely and within
appropriate security standards.
The
potential next step is to look at AI being utilized to
assist in the writing of reports. So that moment,
one of the
challenges for some of our investigators is writing reports isn't their natural
skillset. And so we spend time and energy helping build
those skills. AI may assist them to do that more
effectively and efficiently. So that is a potential next step.
But again, that won't be the end as well because we're looking at the impact of AI
on accident investigation generally.
And so the development of the search tool
in the hands of a really talented researcher is to
identify trends and issues that might lie below
the surface which we're not picking up as early as we might otherwise.
So we see AI as having a really valuable
role, not just to make us more efficient and
effective, but also to help us do our
job simply better, not just faster.
Anything you'd like to add to that?
And of course, the only thing that is AI is going to be an increasing
challenge across transport generally.
So of course we're going to actually need our own AI systems and
our own people experience with working with AI to actually participate
in investigations and so on as well.
Just one last question from me, sorry.
That is you've mentioned the, you or we have mentioned
in conversation the Ombudsman and
they only have powers of recommendation two, don't they? Correct.
They have the powers to be able to expose what they have recommended and
essentially to put more pressure on
entities to respond to them. That's right. Okay. So that's useful.
I think we're done with questions. We really appreciate it. Thank you.
It's been fascinating. Thanks for your time.
And we've
learned a lot. Thank you very much. Thank you very much.
Okay. Do we have CIO? I'll check those in the next one.
Yes, okay.
Welcome.
Thank you for coming a little bit early.
Good to see both of you. So we've got you in theory, we've got you
down for 30 minutes, but if we do run a fraction over
and use the time which we had, which may not be the time you originally
had, then we'll do that. If not, we get in and have a slightly longer lunch.
So anyway, we'll leave it in your hands. Congratulations for 2K.
Yeah, thanks Andy.
Right. In your hands to do an intro.
Thank you. If I may just spend a few minutes
providing some context for the
meeting today. Through the chair, thank you for the opportunity for
our director and CEO, Kane Patena, and myself as board chair to
address Transport Select Committee.
I'd also like to take this opportunity to acknowledge our
retiring director, Keith March, who has just clocked up 50
years of public service. We have a suitable farewell for him in
coming weeks. If this meeting was 15 months
ago, we would be discussing the New Zealand Herald front headlines
about culture issues at the authority, the
unsatisfactory queues at the airports, long waiting lists for
certification and generally negative feedback from the aviation
industry. I want to start today by acknowledging
significant progress the authority has made over the last
year. Much of the progress reflects deliberate work to
modernize how we regulate, strengthen safety and security
and support innovation in a rapidly evolving aviation
environment. There is still much work to be done but the
progress is encouraging and the authority is in good
heart.In the last 12 months, we have refreshed...
H- we have a refreshed board and a refreshed executive team under our new
director and CE, Kane Petenna. Kane has brought strong
reg- regulatory experience and a clear focus on improving
performance. The board have had more than 100 engagements
with industry participants, we've heard consistent themes,
timeliness, responsiveness,
consistency, and stronger engagement.
We're acting on all four.
We have a very clear strategy which includes the eight priorities adopted by the
board
to improve certification timelines, reduce passenger
queues, strengthen the rules framework,
strengthen industry engagement and enablement, build a strong and
positive culture, make saving effici- savings
efficiencies and demonstrate value for money, prioritize the
first principles funding review, and to achieve, um, fiscal
sustainability. In addition, we've started a business
transformation program to look at digitization,
automation, and standardization to improve serv- service levels
and cons- and consistency and cost
base. Encouraged by the minister, the board will be applying
a strong invest to save lens across our digital investment decisions.
Certification performance is improving, uh, but we know they are still, it
is still not where it needs to be. This remains a top priority for
us. We have a dedicated program of work underway to address
immediate service level improvement opportunities in addition to the
business transformation work, uh, and including identification of
quick wins and prioritizing that work.
Major investment in aviation security technology and better alignment of
resources over the last 18 months have resulted in significant
improvement in passenger queue times and a reduction in
cost to operate. Examples of AvSec's
rollout, uh, of CTIX 3D screening technology,
the new lane matrix project, and improved passenger
presentation models. We are particularly proud of the
achievements in this area. The Civil Aviation Rules
Update Program is accelerating, which is all about modernizing the regulatory
framework so it is consistent, responsive to technology and aligned
with international standards. Updated drone rules and a new Part
107 pathway for support, research and development will go live on the
22nd of December. The authority is
now, uh, financially sustainable and not dependent on Crown
funding. That is an over $80 million year-on-year
turnaround. We've now begun the first principles funding review to
ensure fair, future-focused funding.
This review will reset how the system is funded between 2028 and
and will help to ensure costs are shared fairly.
The timing for the review will coincide well with our BT efficiency
drive to minimize costs to the industry and to aviation
passengers. The authority's contributing to wider
government priorities, including the Aviation Action Plan and targeted
support for Pacific aviation security capability.
It was pleasing to see both CAA and AvSec in the top
10 for government agencies with Public Sector Reputation
Index, something we haven't had before.
New Zealand's International Civil Aviation Organization, or
ICAO audit this year reaffirmed our commitment to strong
aviation safety oversight. And finally, aviation
contributes 11% of GDP in New
Zealand. The authority's role is to facilitate the operation of
a safe and secure aviation system, one that is efficient and
enabling of innovation and economic growth.
And it is a responsibility that we take very seriously.
Thank you for the opportunity to make comments.
Thank you, Matt. Um, I'm gonna pick Carlos, then Tangi.
Thank you, Chair. Um, just now when we talked to the minister, he also
agreed that workforce is the major issues in aviation
sector. I want to seek your comment about the current fighting...
like the flight training system and the licensing system.
Is that still fit for purpose?
Um, yeah, I can comment on that. Um, look, what we think that the, the
licensing system, um, overall is fit for purpose in the sense
that it provides the right checks and balances to ensure that,
um, those who, who need to be licensed, uh, are able to meet
the minimum standards and requirements.
Um, that's very different though, to how we work with the sector to make sure that
there are, um, credible pathways through, um, depending on what it
is that the sector needs. What's needed in a large commercial aviation context is
obviously different to, um, smaller operators or those that operate in
tourism. So we are actively looking at, um, how we can support the
licensing system, um, by working, uh, across government and with the sector on
how we can improve the pathways through, um, but it's not something that we can
address on our own.
So is that any reason why we don't change our current system, which
is FAA to US-style ATA, which is
much faster for, for our o- our student to graduate and to
get into the sector?
Yeah. Well, one of the things that we, that we will be looking at, um, the, our
chair had talked about the, the rules program, um, and that's looking at,
um, all aspects of the rules where there are issues, um, that might
hamper our ability to maintain safety and security, to create pathways, um, for
those that operate, uh, and also to drive, um, uh, growth as well.
So, the- these are the sorts of things that we'll be looking at as part of the, the
rules program.
Yeah, but both, both program actually does graduate...
the, the student who graduate with both program are each only got two- 200 hours,
which doesn't really align with the commercializer, which is five- 500
hours. So you still think those two system are fit for
purpose? Because you know, obviously those people who graduate from two,
two... those two system are, are not able to get a
commercializer.
Sorry, could you s- re- repeat the, the question?
I think those people who graduate from either FAA or
ATA-
Mm-hmm.
... they are, they are only graduate with 200 flying hours.
In order to get a commercial license, uh, if, if I'm correct, we, I
believe, uh, they need 500 hours of flying hours there in order to get a
commercial license. This is why I said, will those systems still fit for
purpose to train our next generation to become a
pilot?
Yep. I might just ask our deputy CEO for the, uh, the Safety Oversight
Group who, that looks after the license area just to make some comments on
Um, thank you for the question. So, the system of pilot
licensing, including, um, whether or not we have a multi-crew pilot's
license, an MPR, which I think is, you know, what you're speaking to, the ability
to have a pathway that goes straight into the airlines is something that we're
considering as part of the-
Oh, oh my question is-
Yeah.
... why we don't use a more simple system which is more,
uh, uh, modernized, but we still stick to the old version, which is
the FAA?
Mm. So, we're going to consider that as part of the Rules Update Program, as the
chief executive has said this. So, those come under Rule Part 61.
Um, and we're aware that there are some inconsistencies globally and also some
opportunities for improvement. So, we're working within CA with the
Rules Update Program, but also with the, um, education with Ringaora as
part of the Aviation Action Plan where these, um, these pathways for both pilots
and engineers have been called out.
A- a- and since you mentioned the, from the program to commercial licensing,
please comment. Yeah, I would love to hear that as well.
Can, can you give a little more detail?
Yeah. So, there's obviously a lot of interest from industry about the
availability of pilots into the future.
We see a lot of projections that globally aviation is going to grow
significantly and pilot and av- and engineering shortages will
increase. And so one of the considerations is how can we have a training
system that provides appropriately trained staff into the airline
environment? So, that is feedback we've received from industry and we are looking
into it as part of the, as part of our Rules Update Program.
Y- One of, one of the things that we are mindful of as we
approach our, uh, the rules program, um, is that we
want to be able to work within industry in the sector to make sure that the rules,
the changes that we do make, um, are fit for purpose for, for the
future. Um, it's not something that, um, with, we within civil aviation
can necessarily determine or resolve on our own.
Um, and I think that's one of the key shifts, um, for us when we think about the
rules program and how we improve those rules.
Um, we've already started to engage actively with the sector, um,
both with, with meetings and sessions that we've had with them, but also a recent
survey that we put out where we got some really positive engagement as well.
Um, so I just wanted to assure the committee that, um, to the extent that there is
a, a question around other rules including the specific areas that you
talked about, are they fit for purpose into the future?
Um, what we're focused on is making sure that we work more collaboratively with the
sector to help identify the issues, but also what could be the solutions,
um, to unlock some of these issues or challenges that you've talked about, while at
the same time, while at the same time maintaining safety and security standards.
Because the ability of the aviation sector to thrive is fundamentally built
off a strong foundation of safety and security.
Can I add one comment, if I may, just to help context?
Um, we've, you know, collectively inherited a rules
program that is, um, materially out of date.
Mm-hmm.
Um, there are something like 90 rules that were, that need addressing.
Um, part of that legacy is created by the way it was funded.
It's very limited funding which hasn't increased in something like 21
years. So, we're working very closely with industry.
They have put their hand up and are prepared to part fund an
accelerated rules program uplift, uh, and be heavily
involved, uh, in that program as well.
So, working very collaborative, collaboratively with the industry
to, um, get everything up to date as soon as possible.
Just one, one of, one off the top as well is what is your comment on the
current Massey University, that aviation or pilot program?
Um, do you think that actually fit for purpose or able, you know, graduate
can able to transit from, from their program to a commercial
licensing?
So, whether we've considered Massey Aviation's program?
Uh, Massey University.
Yep.
What's your comment?
Uh, so we do provide oversight of that program.
Uh, so from an aviation safety perspective, we are, we're satisfied that it meets
our requirements and so we work closely with them.
And so, sorry, is your question about the connection between
that- Because I think one of the, one of the issues about that program is, um, those
graduates won't able to find a job in New Zealand because they are not qualified
enough to apply for Air New Zealand jobs.
They need to go to Fiji, they go different, different Pacific island to get a
job. And I don't think this is what we want.
Like, you know, we want to train our people and then they move on to overseas.
So, this is why I want to ask whether you think the program in Massey University is
also fit for purpose as well.
I can offer a comment there. So obviously from a operating safely within the
current system, it's fit for purpose.
But I think in terms of the overall, the overall, um,
growth path of the pilots, that is again something we have to
work with other agencies for because there is involvement from NZQA, there is
looking at the rules, there is looking at the throughput.
So, we think there is room to improve and we
are making sure that we get input from the pilots, from the
schools, from the airlines to look at what this could look like in the future.
Because you're right, it does create significant challenges for us.
So, which, this is the area you guys will be looking for the next 12 months.
Thank you.
Um, just before we go on, uh, could you just introduce yourself too?
Oh, my apologies. Oh, my name is Catherine McGowan.
I'm the deputy chief-
Catherine McGowan?
Yes.
Okay. Thanks, Catherine. Um, and just one follow-up part of that question as well.
So, in the engagement, the, the organizations you're engaging with, does that
include, um, the NZQA s- and
TEC as well? Because I've certainly heard from flight schools that
they, they feel that sometimes that, that they've got people who are not,
um, flight experts at all trying to set a, a course, set course
requirements. So, if you can comment on that, it'll be interesting because I hadn't
picked up that you were, as an organization, also involved in this
course setting. But s- so if you've got CAA, you've got
NZQA, um, and the flight schools all trying
to re- and presumably some of the, um, industry trying to
wrestle with what should go in a course. How does that all work?
So, um, that's guided through the, the Aviation Action Plan.
So we have, we have an Aviation Council.
So the minister may have spoken about-
... the permanent appointment of the Aviation Council.
Yes.
Uh, the Aviation Council, a few months back, released an Aviation Action Plan.
Yeah.
Which directs a number of activities, including the rules update program-
... and including the, um, training pathways for pilot and
engineers, and nominates, uh, lead agencies.
So we are a, a critical stakeholder in that and we're working alongside the other
agencies.
So who are the lead agencies in terms of the educate, setting the, the
education standards?
Uh, may I come back to you with the specifics from the plan?
That, that would be quite useful.
Yeah.
'Cause it would be interesting to see how they all interface with each other.
And who's actually in charge of that. Okay, cool. Hang in.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
(coughs)
It's public knowledge that your Upper North head of aviation
security, uh, is no longer in that role.
Was that a termination or a resignation?
It was a resignation.
Resignation.
(coughs)
What was the value of any payments made to Mr.
de Waardner as part of his resignation?
Um, m- Mr. de Wa- de Waardner had, had, um, been paid out a, a notice
period. Um, so that, that was consistent with the agreement that we had in
place. Um, but he, he, um, resigned from his position
in order to minimize the reputational impact of CAA.
What's, what's the value of that remuneration as part of the notice
period?
I, I, I can't disclose that here, but happy to go away and-
(coughs)
... seek advice and come back with feedback.
Okay. It's interesting given that over the course of the week, we've had
through other select committees, figures disclosed around
folk. Mr. Costa-
(clears throat)
Uh, the Public Service Commissioner himself, um, disclosed that figure.
Pharmac, that figure's been disclosed.
Uh, Ministry of Health figure has been disclosed.
So you, why not disclose that?
Well, I, well, I'm happy to come back to the committee-
Okay.
... with the details, yes.
That's great. Um, are you able to just identify what the salary
band, uh, was for that particular
role?
Uh, I haven't got that off the top of my head, but again, I'm happy to provide that
information afterwards.
That's cool. Um, I've got questions on culture, but I can come
back.
Uh, let's see.
(clears throat)
You might as well carry on for-
Okay.
...
??????. Um, thank you for the comments to start with about if this was 15 months ago.
Yeah. It's not going to be different.
Bit different. Uh,
(clears throat)
You'll probably recall that previously the committee has been informed about
the, um, the lack of staff voice within the
organization as a, as a real issue around staff
culture. Are, are you sort of, what steps have been taken
to enable, um, and empower staff voice as part of the
direction, the future direction for, um, the organization?
But, uh, let me make a comment, a, a broad comment, and I'll ask Cain to-
Mm-hmm.
... for some finer detail. But, um,
what I see-
(coughs)
... and feel at the authority is, is incredibly different than it
was a year ago. Um,
one of the, one of the things that the board does is it walks the floor.
We do lots of visits to, um, airports where our staff work,
and the feedback we're getting now is, is, um, extremely
positive. So, the things we did to address the-
(coughs)
... culture last year, I think have largely worked.
Um, there's a renewed energy and a r- renewed, uh, purpose
of the, of the, uh, (clears throat) of the authority.
And I kind of sat in on a, unbeknownst to Cain-
(coughs)
... I sat in on a, his monthly staff stand-up this morning.
And the feedback, um, from the staff and the feeling is
just very, very positive.
Good.
So maybe some detail?
Yeah. There's, there's a few things I think that help, um, create the culture that
we want. Um, the first is to have a simple, clear,
and concise strategy that's really clear about what our role is in the system, how
our people contribute to that, but also, um, what our priorities
are. Um, because like any government agency, there is a limited amount of
resource.
(coughs)
We need to put that resource where it can be most effective.
The reason why the strategy reset's important is because, um,
it provides clarity to our people on where we want to put our effort and
why. That's not to say that other things aren't-
(coughs)
... important, uh, but it's just less important than the things that we think are
important for us to focus on. And board chair talked about what some of those
priority areas are. Um, the second aspect of it
is for me and for us as an executive team, uh, to be a lot
more visible and accessible to our people as well.
Um, so the chair talked about one example where, um, on a monthly basis
we have a session with all of our people where they can ask us anything, tell us
anything. And the level of engagement, um, is really high.
Um, equally, uh, we get out and about very regularly as well.
And I've certainly got out a lot and will continue to, um, to make sure
that, um, that I'm hearing what's happening on the ground.
Um, 'cause it's all very well for us to sit here at Wellington HQ in our strong
house. Um, what I'm, what I'm, I'm interested in the numbers, but I'm
also interested in the faces and names that represent those numbers.
Um, so there's, there will be an ongoing, um, commitment from me to make sure
that, um, I get out and about and continue to meet our staff at all levels,
including the front line. That's, that's something that we do as an executive team
as well.
(clears throat)
Um, and again, to make ourselves available for any, any issues that people
want to talk to us about. Um, the chair talked about a session
today, a few weeks ago. Um, the executive team and I were up in Auckland where
we spent time with our aviation security officers.
And of course they've had some significant challenges that they've had to deal
with, not just, um, losing the person who was their leader.
Um, there was a measles case that they responded to, really well too.
(clears throat)
And of course we had the A320 groundings.
Mm-hmm.
That of course had an impact on our aviation security services.
So, um, it's really important for me to make sure that we-
Silence. ... are connected to what's happening on the ground, um, because that's, that's
where the, the work happens. That's where the interface with the public occurs as
well. Um, and it's not just our aviation security area, but it's also our safety
area. For example, we have a team that-
(coughs)
... Cathy works at. Um, this week for example, I had the time to sit down with
people who process our licenses and certifications, um, to understand,
you know, what does life actually look like for them.
Uh, and what I can say is that we've got some amazing people in-...
really well qualified, really committed to doing their best to support, uh, the
aviation sector, um, but we don't have more of the terms and systems to support
them to be at their best. That helps validate, from my perspective, why we
need to focus on some of those priority areas, including business transformation,
to make their life easier, but also to provide better services to the sector as
well.
Yeah, can, can I add too, that the, um, culture is wider than just the staff of
the authority. It's the industry.
And, um, the executive and the board have gone out of their way to
engage hugely over the last 12 months with everyone in the sector.
(clears throat)
And that, part of that is building trust and confidence and that ultimately leads
to culture. And in terms of clarity, which Kane talked about, um,
page 29 of annual report, 'cause our strategy, we've boiled it down
to one page that's very simple to understand.
In the right-hand side, there are eight things that the board are focused on, and
we know that in 12 months time if we've improved each one of those eight
things, we've done a good job because we're very focused.
I'll have substance from Dan and then from, uh,
Simon. All right. Um, welcome, Kane and, um,
Mark. Thank you for the work you do.
Um, your culture, I guess, was the, um, you know,
predominant theme in the last few, few years in the
reviews. Um, uh, and I guess
what was unspoken about, um, at the last
reviews was more around the leadership, and, uh, that's of course
why we've, we've seen yourself, uh, elevate, elevated, Kane.
But (clears throat) , what, what initiatives are you doing to make
sure that you as leadership in your ELT are getting the,
other than walking the floors, making sure you're getting the feedback
that you need to hear rather than you want to hear?
Whether it's through, um, engagement surveys-
Mm-hmm.
... 360-degree feedback surveys?
(clears throat) I guess, you, you want to see the culture change.
Anecdotally, it's positive, but what (clears throat) , how will you
see that in the, the numbers and the data, um?
Yeah, we're, we're, we're actually underway right now with that 360-degree
feedback, um, so that, that's literally coming through this week.
Um, people's assessment of us collectively as an executive and each individual
executive member. Um,
and, and people can choose whether they want to put their name to it or
anonymously. It doesn't matter. It's whatever gives us, um, an unbridled view
about people's perception of, of the executive and how we're performing and how
we're leading. Um, the other thing, of course, is that we do have a, um, a regular
staff culture and engagement survey.
Um, at this stage, um, it's an annual survey, but I'm working with the team to look
at, we might have that as your, kind of your baseline marker.
Um, but what other things can we do to sort of check the pulse of the organization
in between then? Because annually doesn't seem fre-
(clears throat) . Mm. ... frequent enough to me to make sure that as things change, particularly with,
uh, the strategic direction that we're heading on, which is that we want to change,
we want to deliver better call services, um, as you're driving through
change, it's really important to make sure that you understand well what's the
culture and what's the level of engagement across the organization.
So I, um, we haven't quite worked out what that looks like yet, but I, but I do
expect that we'll be carrying out more frequent pulse checks in addition to the
annual survey.
Good stuff. Okay, Simon.
And, and, and 12 months ago, we did a, a very in-depth, um,
uh, NPS type survey with staff and also the whole industry.
And we've used that as a baseline to measure ourselves with going forward.
Yeah, great. Excellent. Thank you.
Okay, um, Simon? (clears throat)
Uh, thank you. Um, just on aviation
security,
in the US, uh, the TSA runs a TSA
PreCheck, uh, whereby travelers can
apply to be essentially (clears throat) verified as a
traveler that needs less scrutiny.
That has the benefit of significantly reducing waiting times
for travelers that have gone through the PreCheck.
Is this something that CAA is
considering?
Um, I'm happy to, to answer that. Um, look, well, at the moment,
we're, we're, uh, uh, looking at our business transformation.
We're looking at obviously both the safety and security aspects of it.
Um, uh, we haven't ruled out the possibility of, of
identity screening. Um, what we haven't worked out yet though is actually
what's the, what's the cost that would, needs to be put in place to be able to
administer something like that, um, because there would need to be some investment
for, with what's effectively identity screening.
Um, so, so we haven't yet formed a view on whether or not that's, that's a shift
that we want to make from the current practices that we've got in
place.
Well,
I, I mean, would it be, uh, (clears throat) something that
you could regulate for but leave say airport
operators, uh, to work out how to do it,
uh, more cheaply and effectively?
So I mean, do you, does CAA need to be in the
regulating
and doing space at the same time?
Yeah, the, the, the pr- previous minister had commissioned
a, um, a, um, an efficiency review of the security
services. Um, that review was, was led by the Ministry of
Transport. Um, and, and my understanding is, is that for, for now
the security services will sit with, um, civil aviation, um,
and the Aviation Security Services sits within.
Mm-hmm.
Um, so, so if there's any, uh, intention to move away from that, then that would be
something that would obviously be led by the minister with the Ministry of
Transport. But for current purposes, um, the efficiency review has shown that we
are, um, have driven s- efficiencies in terms of the cost to administer our
security services.
Mm-hmm.
Um, and the performance metrics, particularly around, um, passenger queue times,
um, has significantly improved.
Okay, thank you. Mark?
Question from me, just on, in terms of AVSEC.
Um, so the way in which it's funded or charged, I
understand, is essentially a,
has been a global system or global system, uh, uh, uh, a, a
nation-wide system.
Yeah.
So, across subsidies, across the system, except more recently
with-... introduction, introduction of new services, international
services in Dunedin and Hamilton.
(clears throat)
Is that correct?
Well, it, it is not a cross-subsidy across the system.
The, arguably there is one between airports.
Um-
Ah, okay. So just-
So, so can you-
... can you explain the, can you explain the charging ra-
Well, the way-
... the way in which you charge the
service? Yeah, okay. ... it carries through a, a standard passenger levy.
Sorry?
The, the charging system is through a passenger levy
that will go onto an, a ticket.
Yes, okay.
Um-
And this passenger levy l- levied on...
On the passenger, which then-
Of, of this, of, only of the services that use the, um-
Of, of traveling-
...
Yes. ... customers through, go on, through airports onto planes.
Uh, no. Be the, but presumably that is on the passengers who are traveling through
the security system as opposed to those which are not part of the security system?
The, theoretically, yes.
(clears throat)
The way it works, um, Chair, is, um, there is
a, there is a domestic passenger services levy.
Yes.
Um, and there's an international passenger services levy.
Um, and that's just simply a flat rate based on passenger numbers.
Um, we, we, uh, charge that directly to the airlines, uh,
and then it's up to the airlines to determine whether or not they pass the, um,
pass that on to consumers. Um, but it's w- it's, the way I'd describe it,
it's more of a network pricing model rather than a, a, a pure cost
recovery model.
(clears throat)
Um, because you've got obviously very, uh, large volumes in
Auckland, um, compared to somewhere like Invercargill, for
example, where you've got less volume coming through.
So, if you were to look at the, the actual cost to service Auckland
Airport, um, it's actually quite cheap because you've got large volume coming
through, um, compared to somewhere like Dunedin where you haven't got the same
level of volume. So, if you were to calculate it on a, on a, you know, on
a true cost basis, um, then, um, you, then,
yeah, you'd end up with a different result.
But at the moment it's just a flat fee, um, respective of-
So, so, okay, so, so you say the cost of running the a- aviation security system is
this, and then you charge that, uh, on a per passenger basis-
Correct.
... for any passenger using the, essentially it's the jet services and the
international services, and, uh-
Corres- irrespective of, of where they're flying out of.
Irrespective of where they're flying out of. Okay.
So, uh, what is the concern that's been
expressed by the Dunedin
and, uh, or in relation to the Dunedin and Hamilton services?
'Cause I thought they felt that they were being charged more than, you know, they
were being separated out from that and charged the extra cost, or was it the
establishment cost of the, um, uh, the equipment, et cetera,
in those areas? What, what, what was the situation there?
Possibly the establishment cost.
I might need a bit more information and come back to you on-
Yeah, okay. Then we-
... what the specifics there.
Um, okay. And then a specific question.
Um, Invercargill, when I
visited Invercargill Airport and talked to them, uh, you had an extraordinary
number of, um, of personnel there for, um, you
know, five, literally five f- five flights a week.
Uh, just, and it was too... So, I'm getting down to it.
It's a, it's a, a sort of slightly, you might say it's in the weeds, but it was, it
was just so extraordinarily high for the number of, um, flights
that there are, and it is only the outgoing flight that you cover anyway.
Um, it, and it was two, uh, they, they were running two shifts and it was like, uh,
oh, it was staggering to me. I think it was 17 or 19 or something or other people
to service literally five flights a week and running two shifts when
one of those shifts wouldn't even have a flight.
Yeah.
How did you come to this situation?
Is there-
Yeah. We have, we have to come back to you on that.
It could, it could have been a scheduling issue that-
Sorry?
It could have been a scheduling issue that affected the rosters.
I'll, I'll, I'll need a bit more detail.
No, this is an ongoing, this, the airport said this is an ongoing issue
or a scheduling issue. It's just that that's the number of personnel that are
employed in that particular location.
I, I'd be interested in you coming back with some information on that.
Yeah.
It just did seem... Yeah.
Yeah. I think it is an-
Unusually, unusually, um, inefficient. The way it
was described. Yeah. There, there is an inherent ine- there is an inherent inefficiency in small
airports, uh-
Sorry?
... because you have to r- there's, there's an inherent inefficiency in smaller
airports because of you have to roster people on for a period of
time. You maybe have one flight during that time.
It's just very difficult to roster around some of the smaller
airports. Hamilton is the other example that's, um,
difficult.
Without getting too much into the weeds or trying not to get too much into the
weeds, people do have part-time jobs sometimes.
But you know, I just think it just seems a very incr- a very expensive way of we're
trying to take cost out. And I noticed that you've increased the cost across the
system by 10% plus in the last year.
Um, I would've thought any place that you can look for savings might be a good
idea.
Yeah.
And I can, I can, uh, look, I can assure the committee, we are, we are looking at
cost savings, particularly into the future.
I mean, the, the pricing reset was obviously based on the,
uh, work that had been done previously based on the way that we'd operated and the,
and the costs. Um,
c- since then, in fact, even before then, we've looked at how we can make
improvements, particularly through our screening technology, to create more
efficiencies in how we operate. So, it'll take a bit of time for some of that stuff
to flow through all the airports. Um, but, but, um, we are looking at how we
continue to drive efficiencies through our screening services.
Well, I, will I be looking, looking at with interest in that particular area, th-
that which leads on to the, the other a- um, element which w- there has been some
thought over a period of time and I know that the landing at the moment had been
that, um, s- uh, CAA continues to do aviation security
services. But whether in fact that might be, um,
provided by somebody else in, you know, and it may, that may be different in
different, um, airports as well. Um, and that, you know,
that's the kind of thing that I, I do wonder whether, you know, it might be done
differently in an airport like Invercargill or
Dunedin or Hamilton, where the, the service, you know, might be provided by
somebody else. But I'm interested in your, in your thoughts.
Yeah. Yeah, look, look, um,
there was a discussion we had about 12 months ago-
Mm-hmm.
... particularly when the performance of AVSEC was, um, not particularly
good. Um, the ministry have worked for the last year
on, uh, the other possibilities-
(clears throat)
Mm-hmm.
... other models that could be adopted.
Uh, our conscious effort was to create the
best counterfactual we could. So we've
driven as much efficiency and cost savings in AVSEC as we
can in this period of time. Um, using innovation, using
technology to a point now where costs are coming down,
we're meeting the KPIs with, with queues.
Uh, and there's been remarkable turnaround in both cost base and, uh, and
service levels to a point where the indications from the ministry is that they are
happy with our performance and won't be looking for other models at this
stage.
Well, I'd be, I'd be interested in some further advice on what you've, you know-
Sure.
... in those particular situations that I've raised. Okay.
Any other questions people have got?
No. Yeah, well, we will, thank you very much for, uh, coming in.
Thank you for the work you're doing.
Uh, there will probably be-
(clears throat)
... some further follow-up written questions, um, as we do for all-
... all entities. So it's not picked on anybody in particular.
Okay.
Uh, but great to see you there and, um, see you in no time.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you.